![](cover/Ebook-cover-RGB.jpg)

[]{#00_PRELIMS_s01_Endorsements.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

::: {#00_PRELIMS_s01_Endorsements.xhtml__00_PRELIMS_s01_Endorsements_sec_001 .section .endorsements .frontmatter aria-labelledby="_00_PRELIMS_s01_Endorsements_h1_001"}
# []{#00_PRELIMS_s01_Endorsements.xhtml_page_i .pagebreak aria-label="Page i" role="doc-pagebreak"}Praise for *The Learning and Development Handbook* {#00_PRELIMS_s01_Endorsements.xhtml__00_PRELIMS_s01_Endorsements_h1_001 .title}

This is *the* handbook that you need to read if you're in L&D or any
leadership or management role in your organisation. It stimulates the
creative juices to consider what could be next to help reach your
vision. Packed with the practical no-nonsense we've come to expect from
Michelle. Invest in this resource to level up your thinking in this
space.

Amy Brann, Director of Synaptic Potential, author of Engaged, Make Your
Brain Work and Neuroscience for Coaches, keynote speaker, consultant

I expected great things when I heard that Michelle was writing *The
Learning and Development Handbook* and I wasn't disappointed.
Insightful, informative and brilliantly structured. Michelle really
walks her talk as a Learning and Development practitioner making every
chapter easy to absorb, learn from and relate to. Many handbooks can be
dry tomes but this is definitely not one of them. I highly recommend
this as a worthwhile read for anyone in business

Lucinda Carney, author of *How to be a Change Superhero*, host of the HR
Uprising Podcast and CEO of Actus Software

I was hooked on Michelle's insights on the world of L&D when I followed
her daily #NoPlasters tweets. This book is a long-overdue evolution of
that series and takes it to a whole other level. There is so much I love
about this book. The structure is genius, the honesty of Michelle's
experience and the drive to share her learning about learning with
others for starters. She really shows in this book the level of depth
and breadth of this wonderful world of learning and development. It does
not matter if you are starting out in your career in this amazing
profession or have years and years of experience there is something for
everyone in this. And the reading lists in every chapter will take you
further on an amazing learning adventure. It *is* a page turner.

David Hayden, co-author of Learning and Development in the Workplace,
Digital Learning Portfolio Manager (L&D) at CIPD

[]{#00_PRELIMS_s01_Endorsements.xhtml_page_ii .pagebreak
aria-label="Page ii" role="doc-pagebreak"}Michelle writes with complete
commitment to helping L&D people achieve efficient, effective, engaging
and enjoyable learning and development experiences irrespective of size
of department or organisation. The superb 'short read' at the start of
every chapter makes it easy to get key information before deciding if
you need to go deeper -- perfect for busy professionals. This should be
within arm's reach of every L&D practitioner who is serious about
modernising learning and aligning it with business strategy.

Jessica Chivers, coaching psychologist and CEO, The Talent Keeper
Specialists

I alternate between being an ice-skating and deep-sea diving type of
reader and this handbook caters to both. I found that the short vs long
read format makes it easy to get the information I need, in the way I
need it. Not a book to be wasted sitting on a shelf, this will be a 'go
to' for me!'

Amelia Clark, L&D Practitioner

Michelle has been there, she's got a whole collection of T-shirts and in
this book she generously shares her extensive experience of what needs
doing to modernise learning and make L&D more effective in
organisations. As I read her words, I could hear her voice -- it felt
like she was sitting beside me as my personal coach. From the not
inconsiderable #NoPlasters campaign, she has created a no-nonsense
treasure trove of practical ideas, advice, action plans and tips, with
case studies to give meaning to what's been achieved. Following her own
advice, she includes plenty of reflection and gives the reader the
confidence and encouragement to try things out for themselves. There is
only one Michelle but if you invest in this book you'll have her on your
team and she'll help you fly!

Joan Keevil, Chair of the eLearning Network

An eminently useful guide, based on practical experience and supported
by research, this is a great handbook for any L&D practitioner looking
to move beyond the traditional classroom delivery model.

Donald H Taylor, Chair, Learning and Performance Institute

In our fast-changing world the facilitation of engaging and effective
learning requires a radical new foundation. Based on a depth of
practical experience, this book defines a toolkit of strategies and
tactics that now underpin successful organisational learning. Sound
theory mixed with innovative practice makes this a must-read for those
serious about impactful learning.

Andy Lancaster, Head of Learning at CIPD

[]{#00_PRELIMS_s01_Endorsements.xhtml_page_iii .pagebreak
aria-label="Page iii" role="doc-pagebreak"}This is a brilliant curation
of helpful thoughts and sources of information, and as such is an
excellent read and resource in itself. The quality content, clearly
presented and simply said, is delivered in a warm, open, informative and
engaging manner. It invites the reader to learn, reflect, draw their own
conclusions and apply the practical content to their circumstances.
Whether you are new to L&D or a seasoned L&Der, Michelle's book will
have you thinking, reflecting and growing as it provides both challenge
and comfort around our practice and place in the world of HR and work,
and beyond.

Denise Sanderson-Estcourt, Head of People, The Open Data Institute

Making the strategic shift from training to evidence-based learning and
development is no easy task when trying to create a continuous
improvement learning organisation with measurable impact. It is so much
more than just terminology. This book helps with the pain and pleasure
of operating in this space with practical advice, frameworks and
strategies.As an experienced practitioner herself, Michelle understands
that there is no one right way of delivering L&D but acts as a guide to
enable you to find your own way supporting you with case studies, tips
and ideas but more importantly that call to action to nudge you out of
your place of comfort to deal with the complexity of the workplace in an
ever increasingly complex world.

Shakil Butt (FCIPD, FCCA) HR & Leadership Consultant, Founder of HR Hero
for Hire

It's not often I get really excited about a new book on workplace
learning and development. This book is different. Michelle has the gift
of explaining concepts and situations -- especially in the corporate
learning and development field -- in an easy-to-understand way which
focuses on the practical aspects and that is what we all need. This is
an excellent handbook of all things that the modern workplace training
professional needs and I thoroughly recommend it to all in the learning
and performance field.

Colin Steed, co-founder of the Learning & Performance Institute and
founder of Learning Now TV[]{#00_PRELIMS_s01_Endorsements.xhtml_page_iv
.pagebreak aria-label="Page iv" role="doc-pagebreak"}
:::

[]{#00_PRELIMS_s02_Title.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

[]{#00_PRELIMS_s04_Dedication.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

::: {#00_PRELIMS_s04_Dedication.xhtml__00_PRELIMS_s04_Dedication_sec_001 .section .dedication .dedication role="doc-dedication"}
[]{#00_PRELIMS_s04_Dedication.xhtml_page_vii .pagebreak
aria-label="Page vii" role="doc-pagebreak"}To my niece, Rosalind Irene
Boxall

8 May 2015 to 1 November 2019

You lived your short life as an example to us all;

always smiling, willing, fearless, feisty and brave.

Shine bright like a firework,
Rosie.[]{#00_PRELIMS_s04_Dedication.xhtml_page_viii .pagebreak
aria-label="Page viii" role="doc-pagebreak"}
:::

[]{#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

[]{#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

::: {#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml__00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI_sec_001 .section .loi .loi aria-labelledby="_00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI_h1_001"}
# List of Figures {#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml__00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI_h1_001 .title}

<nav class="loi">

1.  [[[Figure 2.1  Girlguiding L&D Strategy Map
    ]{.default}](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#_04_CHAPTER_C02_Figure_2_1)]{#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml_loi_04_CHAPTER_C02_Figure_2_1}
2.  [[[Figure 4.1  Virtual College
    ]{.default}](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#_06_CHAPTER_C04_Figure_4_1)]{#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml_loi_06_CHAPTER_C04_Figure_4_1}
3.  [[[Figure 9.1  ICE Framework
    ]{.default}](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#_12_CHAPTER_C09_Figure_9_1)]{#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml_loi_12_CHAPTER_C09_Figure_9_1}
4.  [[[Figure 10.1   EPC Framework
    ]{.default}](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#_13_CHAPTER_C10_Figure_10_1)]{#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml_loi_13_CHAPTER_C10_Figure_10_1}
5.  [[[Figure 11.1  3Rs Framework
    ]{.default}](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_1)]{#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml_loi_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_1}
6.  [[[Figure 11.2  Three boxes
    ]{.default}](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_2)]{#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml_loi_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_2}
7.  [[[Figure 11.3  Three boxes plus assets
    ]{.default}](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_3)]{#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml_loi_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_3}
8.  [[[Figure 11.4  Three boxes plus assets plus journey
    ]{.default}](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_4)]{#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml_loi_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_4}
9.  [[[Figure 11.5  Three boxes plus assets plus journey plus community
    ]{.default}](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_5)]{#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml_loi_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_5}
10. [[[Figure 11.6  3Rs Framework with added Reflection
    ]{.default}](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_6)]{#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml_loi_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_6}
11. [[[Figure 13.1  Unconscious to conscious competence
    ]{.default}](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#_17_CHAPTER_C13_Figure_13_1)]{#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml_loi_17_CHAPTER_C13_Figure_13_1}

</nav>
:::

[]{#00_PRELIMS_s15_Foreword.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

::: {#00_PRELIMS_s15_Foreword.xhtml__00_PRELIMS_s15_Foreword_sec_001 .section .foreword .foreword aria-labelledby="_00_PRELIMS_s15_Foreword_h1_001" role="doc-foreword"}
# []{#00_PRELIMS_s15_Foreword.xhtml_page_xv .pagebreak aria-label="Page xv" role="doc-pagebreak"}[Foreword](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_00_PRELIMS_s15_Foreword) {#00_PRELIMS_s15_Foreword.xhtml__00_PRELIMS_s15_Foreword_h1_001 .title}

by Laura Overton

*Award winning L&D industry analyst, author and facilitator and Founder
of the Towards Maturity L&D benchmark study*

There comes a time where an organisation's traditional approach to L&D
is no longer enough.

A time when traditional classroom offerings are no longer sustainable,
when the expected budget and resources are no longer available. When
business is moving so fast that a traditional training needs analysis
has barely begun before today's critical demands have eclipsed the
original urgent need. A time where the reskilling and talent agenda
shifts from the HR plan to become your CEO's top priority for driving
business survival. A time where learning professionals have new
opportunities to make innovative contributions that add a new levels of
business value.

To be honest, the L&D community have been discussing for decades the
need to revolutionise, rethink, remodel and reframe L&D offerings in the
digital, ever-changing workplace.

It is all very well *talking* about the modernisation of L&D: the
challenge comes when we need to act.

And that time is now.

My interest in modern learning practices started in the mid 1980s --
fresh out of university and inspired by new technology to deliver
learning any time anywhere. In the early 2000s my frustration with slow
progress led me to revisit the question 'How can learning innovation
deliver real business value?' Curiosity led me to establish the Towards
Maturity benchmark study that explored the question from many angles
around the globe.

During my 15-year tenure leading the Towards Maturity research study, my
team continually searched for examples of effective practices that drove
real business value. And we found Michelle Parry Slater. She was working
at an international company, weary of travel as an L&D manager
delivering workshops around the globe. Her vision captured our attention
-- learning that delivered practical business outputs required more than
an injection of education. It was based on the opportunity to have great
conversations, surface the best explanations and share ideas. Michelle's
Learn Share Grow model was at the heart of her online academy and her
practical strategies for delivering her vision were an inspiration to
many.

[]{#00_PRELIMS_s15_Foreword.xhtml_page_xvi .pagebreak
aria-label="Page xvi" role="doc-pagebreak"}My own research showed that
high-performing learning organisations such as Michelle's embodied a
refresh of ideas and a reframing of learning services. They consistently
showed that modern learning strategies that deliver business results are
focussed on business value from start to finish. They recognised that
L&D is not just about providing content and information but finding new
ways to equip individuals, teams, and the organisation as they adjust
and adapt to new working models.

High-performing learning organisations embrace the holistic processes of
learning -- the formal, informal, natural processes that are both
complex and complicated. They are not just the destiny of the elite,
those with great budgets, full business backing or big teams.

High-performing learning organisations come from all sectors and
business sizes. What sets them apart is that they are inspired and led
by true learning changemakers, those who understand the changing
requirements of work and are prepared to leverage their talent and the
talent of those around them to meet those needs in new fresh ways.

Those learning changemakers are real people in real workplaces willing
to explore, to act and to try something different to move L&D towards a
more modern, consultative, blended learning practice.

Michelle embraces this philosophy and through her #NoPlasters campaign
shared her valuable tips and encouraged others to do the same. This
handbook takes that practice one step further as she explores the
practical tactics, frameworks, mindsets, skillsets, toolsets and
datasets we need to take the next step into a modern future.

As an analyst and writer, I know that capturing and sharing ideas can be
exhilarating, but it is also something that demands courage and
tenacity. As each word and chapter are finalised, you always believe you
could have shared more. In this book, Michelle has shared just enough!
Enough to make sense of a complex world, enough to build courage and
enough to get started.

Michelle said at the height of her #NoPlasters campaign, 'If I can help
one person in their job to take the next step then it's worth it.' This
handbook goes further, helping you to identify and take the best step
that will help you make progress in your own complex world of work.

What is more, this handbook will stand the test of time. Michelle's
recommendations come from a deep-rooted sense of getting the work done
-- the work of unlocking potential, one step at a time. For me she is a
true learning changemaker and this handbook will help all those in L&D
who want to be the same.
:::

[]{#00_PRELIMS_s16_Preface.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

::: {#00_PRELIMS_s16_Preface.xhtml__00_PRELIMS_s16_Preface_sec_001 .section .preface .preface aria-labelledby="_00_PRELIMS_s16_Preface_h1_001" role="doc-preface"}
# []{#00_PRELIMS_s16_Preface.xhtml_page_xvii .pagebreak aria-label="Page xvii" role="doc-pagebreak"}[Preface](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_00_PRELIMS_s16_Preface) {#00_PRELIMS_s16_Preface.xhtml__00_PRELIMS_s16_Preface_h1_001 .title}

Generally it is fair to say that people like comfortable shoes. We might
try new shoes, but there is nothing like the familiarity of comfortable
shoes: they feel nice, easy, warm, reassuring. The problem is they
eventually wear out and don't serve their purpose. I see L&D in
comfortable shoes in many places I look. Coasting along; we need to
change our shoes. Our organisations need to demand more of us; indeed
we, need to demand more of ourselves. The call to action has been laid
down for us (see the 2019 CIPD report *Professionalising Learning and
Development*) and we need to rise to the challenge to offer more
effective, efficient, enjoyable and engaging L&D.

Sukh Pabial, a friend and fellow L&D practitioner, sparked me thinking
in a blog he wrote, *L&D is not about simplicity*
([[https://pabial.wordpress.com/2019/04/09/ld-is-not-about-simplicity]{.url-hyperlink}](https://pabial.wordpress.com/2019/04/09/ld-is-not-about-simplicity)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/YX42-QVRE]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/YX42-QVRE))).
That L&D is complex, indeed that life is complex, is the reason I wanted
to write this book. L&D is complex because organisations are complex,
people are complex. As practitioners, how will we ever get to grips with
the complexity and provide learning which is simple enough to be
understood, yet sophisticated enough to be, well, enough?

To simplify the complexity, I find it useful to understand it more. I
encourage you to really get to know your businesses before you even
consider what you can do in L&D for your organisation. As an L&D
practitioner looking to simplify the complex, to be effective in your
practice, and to modernise your L&D offer, I offer you this book to help
you know where to start.

Many books you read, conference speakers you see or TED talks you watch
will tell you their model, their way, their answers. They make you feel
their way is the only way: within the walls of their book lies the one
true answer to all the problems, follow these top ten rules on how to do
this thing and there will be nirvana. As one practitioner to another, I
can reassure you this book will not do that. There is no one way to
navigate the complexities. There is no one nirvana. There is no one
person who can influence the right answers for you and your organisation
-- this book has so many influences from so many people I couldn't name
them all. There is a way forward for you, for your organisation and for
the people whose learning []{#00_PRELIMS_s16_Preface.xhtml_page_xviii
.pagebreak aria-label="Page xviii" role="doc-pagebreak"}you are
responsible for, but there is no one way for everyone. Wouldn't life be
boring if there was?

I am an L&D practitioner, like you. I am responsible for making L&D
happen, like you. Over the years of experience I have gathered some
thoughts and ideas. I have shared them via Twitter, via blogs, via the
conference circuit, via Learning Now TV, and now here in this book to
reach more L&Ders who may feel alone or frustrated at trying to achieve
better L&D outcomes. I have been practicing my craft of helping adults
learn for twenty years. I have been writing this book for one. We can
but do our best. I therefore bring you my truth, what I know and have
experienced in my context. I hope that it resonates with you and your
context.

Within the walls of this book there are things to consider, to think
about and to try. There are some frameworks, ideas, experiences and
stories shared. But there is no one way. There is only your way for your
setting. This book (and indeed any you read) needs to be considered only
in light of supporting you to create your own way. This book is
practical and will encourage you to be practical in its application.
This book is not academic, nor massively researched, though I have tried
to be evidence based. It is a book written for L&Ders who are looking to
move to a more modern workplace learning approach. This book is to
encourage you to step outside of your mindset and what you may know as
truth. This book is simply here to help you to get curious, to help you
try things, to help you feel brave, to be your cheersquad, to help you
move towards more effective, efficient, engaging, and enjoyable
workplace learning. This book is not the only way to climb your
metaphorical L&D mountain, but I genuinely hope it encourages you to
have a go.

<aside aria-label="An aside: a quick word on the word ‘learners’ (preface 1)" class="box" id="_00_PRELIMS_s16_Preface_sec_002" role="complementary">

An aside: a quick word on the word 'learners'

I don't like the word 'learners' really. People are people. However
calling people people in some contexts doesn't identify them
sufficiently for you to know which people I am talking about. So for
want of a better descriptor, in this book I will call people who are
undertaking some type of learning, learners. Forgive me, I know you are
all unique, individuals and worthy of more than a generic descriptor.

</aside>

Protecting identities

On occasion in this book I cannot be specific in my examples or evidence
of former clients who don't want to be named, for a variety of reasons.
I respect that choice and make no apologies for respecting their
confidence.
:::

[]{#00_PRELIMS_s17_Acknowledgements.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

::: {#00_PRELIMS_s17_Acknowledgements.xhtml__00_PRELIMS_s17_Acknowledgements_sec_001 .section .acknowledgements .acknowledgments aria-labelledby="_00_PRELIMS_s17_Acknowledgements_h1_001" role="doc-acknowledgments"}
# []{#00_PRELIMS_s17_Acknowledgements.xhtml_page_xix .pagebreak aria-label="Page xix" role="doc-pagebreak"}[Acknowledgements](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_00_PRELIMS_s17_Acknowledgements) {#00_PRELIMS_s17_Acknowledgements.xhtml__00_PRELIMS_s17_Acknowledgements_h1_001 .title}

When writing a book, we really have to be grateful first and foremost to
those who choose to read it. Thank you for putting your hard-earned cash
into this relationship. I trust it brings you useful value.

Big thanks to my family who enable the eclectic life I lead, of my
business, my job, my volunteering and dog owning. To Jamie, Beth, David,
Amy and my parents, Irene and John, I am profoundly and always grateful
for all you support me with and do for me, for believing in me and for
loving me.

A special shout out to my daughter Amy Slater for her diagrams used in
the book, which sit proudly alongside Federico Gaggero's illustrations.

To all my wider family, I thank you for shaping me. Special thanks to
Samantha for your work at Kairos Modern Learning, and Annette for being
simply amazing.

There were some people who helped turn me into an author -- Lucinda
Carney, David Hayden, Alison Jones, Francis Miller, Laura Overton, Phil
Willcox, and Roisin Woolnough. Book experts, cheersquad, generous
knowledge sharers, thank you.

There are many colleagues and clients without whom I could not have
learned my craft. Thank you sincerely to you all (many of whom don't
want to be named as the world thinks they were doing this modern
learning stuff already!). A special call out to Katherine Marlow who
first believed in me, to Andy Lancaster and the CIPD Learning team, to
the Curiosity Team at Virtual College and to Ed Parsloe at The OCM, plus
so many fab clients who taught me as much as I taught them.

Thank you to the original readers, sharers, supporters and beneficiaries
of my 2015 #NoPlasters Twitter campaign of tips on better ways to do
L&D. Particular thanks to Kevin Maye and Katherine Chapman, who I only
knew through Twitter, and yet they stepped in and stepped up to cover a
holiday during the year of tweets.

An enormous thank you to Girlguiding. I love facilitating weekly
meetings with my amazing Guides who inspire me with their energy,
creativity and thinking. Sincere thanks for the honour of being Lead
Volunteer for L&D, enabling the evolution of learning within our
Movement through a fabulous team of staff and volunteers.

[]{#00_PRELIMS_s17_Acknowledgements.xhtml_page_xx .pagebreak
aria-label="Page xx" role="doc-pagebreak"}Thank you to Colin Steed and
my colleagues at Learning Now TV who enable me to share my ideas and
those of so many interesting people I interview. Colin does such a great
job of sharing wonderful learning to L&Ders, and I am proud to have a
small part in that adventure alongside him.

Thanks to my personal learning network, my #PLN, whom I adore for their
thinking, their challenge, their engagement and their push. Tweeps, I am
deeply indebted to you all.

And finally, thank you to fellow founder Fiona McBride and all our
volunteer hosts at #LnDcowork. You are an awesome community for all who
work in L&D/OD/HR. We started #LnDcowork to avoid working alone in the
freelance world; feel free to join in. You can check for dates at
[[https://about.me/lndcowork]{.url-hyperlink}](https://about.me/lndcowork)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/4KNQ-KKBZ]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/4KNQ-KKBZ)).
:::

[]{#00_PRELIMS_s18_Halftitle.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

[]{#01_CHAPTER_HOW.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

# []{#01_CHAPTER_HOW.xhtml_page_1 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 1" role="doc-pagebreak"}[How to use this book](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_01_CHAPTER_HOW) {#01_CHAPTER_HOW.xhtml__01_CHAPTER_HOW_h1_001 .title}

This handbook is for the busy L&Der who needs a quick read. It is
arranged in three parts. Within these parts, each chapter follows a
formulaic approach to make it easy for you to pick the book up and put
it down as you need.

This is the structure:

Part One

**Practical L&D tips**

*Part One is in eight chapters. Each one forms part of your
practitioner's guide. Each chapter is a topic that can be considered
independently and as a whole, built on each other to form a loose
framework for workplace learning.*

Part Two

**Frameworks**

*Part Two is in three chapters. Each one offers a framework for you to
consider and hang your work upon for efficient, effective, engaging and
enjoyable L&D. These frameworks are not learning design models; they are
more overarching concepts to consider in L&D. Illustrations and client
stories bring these frameworks to life.*

Part Three

**Strategies**

*Part Three is in three chapters. They are intended to help you
understand your context and how that impacts on the L&D you offer. This
part is more than topics, tips and frameworks. Rather, the focus here is
to offer ways of considering your overall approach to L&D to ensure a
sustainable future.*

<figure id="_01_CHAPTER_HOW_UTable_0_1" class="table">
<p><a href="#01_CHAPTER_HOW.xhtml__01_CHAPTER_HOW_UTable_0_1-Skip">Skip
table</a></p>
<div class="table" role="table" tabindex="0">
<table class="no-border">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><p><strong>1</strong></p>
<p>Practical L&amp;D</p></td>
<td><p><strong>2</strong></p>
<p>Strategy for L&amp;D</p></td>
<td><p><strong>3</strong></p>
<p>Stakeholder engagement</p></td>
<td><p><strong>4</strong></p>
<p>Consultative L&amp;D</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><strong>5</strong></p>
<p>Data and evaluation</p></td>
<td><p><strong>6</strong></p>
<p>Social learning</p></td>
<td><p><strong>7</strong></p>
<p>Digital learning</p></td>
<td><p><strong>8</strong></p>
<p>Blending learning</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><strong>9</strong></p>
<p>ICE: Information Communication Education</p></td>
<td><p><strong>10</strong></p>
<p>EPC: Environment Permission Culture</p></td>
<td><p><strong>11</strong></p>
<p>3 Rs: Required Resourced Referred</p></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><strong>12</strong></p>
<p>Evolution or revolution</p></td>
<td><p><strong>13</strong></p>
<p>Reflective practice</p></td>
<td><p><strong>14</strong></p>
<p>Hold it lightly</p></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
</figure>

Each chapter contains eight sections. Each one is explained on the next
pages.

<figure id="_01_CHAPTER_HOW_UFigure_0_1" class="figure"
aria-describedby="_01_CHAPTER_HOW_UFigure_0_1">
<p><span id="01_CHAPTER_HOW.xhtml_page_2" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 2" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF001.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

An introductory topic précis, **the shorter read** will give you enough
to spark your thinking and help you get started. If you are busy you can
get the gist of the whole book with these 14 chapter five-minute (-ish)
reads. Or, if you are not sure how interested you are in a chapter's
topic, the shorter read is a taster. Or, if you want a refresher of the
chapter later on, you don't have to read the whole chapter again.

<figure id="_01_CHAPTER_HOW_UFigure_0_2" class="figure"
aria-describedby="_01_CHAPTER_HOW_UFigure_0_2">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF002.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

**The longer read** is the deep dive into the topic, broken down into
subheadings to enable you to get straight to what you are looking for.
Although it's designed to be read in its entirety, I know people like to
bob in and out. Occasionally you will see examples in boxes to help
bring the topic to life.

<figure id="_01_CHAPTER_HOW_UFigure_0_3" class="figure"
aria-describedby="_01_CHAPTER_HOW_UFigure_0_3">
<p><span id="01_CHAPTER_HOW.xhtml_page_3" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 3" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF003.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

In each chapter I have tried to bring my thinking to life with a **case
study** to share a story or interview so we can learn from others. It is
comforting to know you are not alone with challenges you face. It can be
a useful spark to hear how others handled their challenges, and came out
the other side. I have offered my reflections on each case study, but
these are merely my thoughts. The real value of the case studies is when
you reflect on them within your ow context.

<figure id="_01_CHAPTER_HOW_UFigure_0_4" class="figure"
aria-describedby="_01_CHAPTER_HOW_UFigure_0_4">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF004.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

The success criteria for the topic are focused around mindset, skillset,
toolset and dataset. Hence... **the 'set list**. Feel free to scribble
your own ideas for success criteria in these boxes too.

<figure id="_01_CHAPTER_HOW_UFigure_0_5" class="figure"
aria-describedby="_01_CHAPTER_HOW_UFigure_0_5">
<p><span id="01_CHAPTER_HOW.xhtml_page_4" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 4" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF005.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

**The tweet tips** are from my #NoPlasters campaign to reduce sticking
plaster solutions in L&D, alongside a tips checklist to encourage your
thinking and how to use the ideas.

<figure id="_01_CHAPTER_HOW_UFigure_0_6" class="figure"
aria-describedby="_01_CHAPTER_HOW_UFigure_0_6">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF006.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

**The thinking questions** are a suggested list of questions to help you
reflect on the chapter's topic within your own workplace context.
Perhaps mull them over with a colleague.

<figure id="_01_CHAPTER_HOW_UFigure_0_7" class="figure"
aria-describedby="_01_CHAPTER_HOW_UFigure_0_7">
<p><span id="01_CHAPTER_HOW.xhtml_page_5" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 5" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF007.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

**The action plan** is a suggested set of next steps as your call to
action. Be sure to add your own and take action!

<figure id="_01_CHAPTER_HOW_UFigure_0_8" class="figure"
aria-describedby="_01_CHAPTER_HOW_UFigure_0_8">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF008.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

More than a simple bibliography, **the library list** points to
resources such as books, blogs, web articles, research, podcasts,
Learning Now TV interviews, conference sessions, and other resources
which have informed my thinking and have influenced the chapter. They
are somewhere for you to head to for further exploration and learning.
[]{#01_CHAPTER_HOW.xhtml_page_6 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 6"
role="doc-pagebreak"}

[]{#02_PART_P01.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

:::: {#02_PART_P01.xhtml__02_PART_P01_sec_001 .section .part .part aria-labelledby="_02_PART_P01_h1_001" role="doc-part"}
<div>

[]{#02_PART_P01.xhtml_page_7 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 7"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[[Part]{.label .label} [One]{.ordinal
.ordinal}](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_02_PART_P01_sec_001)

# [Practical L&D Tips](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_02_PART_P01_sec_001) {#02_PART_P01.xhtml__02_PART_P01_h1_001 .title}

</div>

These first eight chapters offer you a toolkit along a loose scaffolded
framework that you can use to consider your workplace learning offer.
Starting with organisational and learning strategy, we move onto
stakeholder engagement and consultation, gathering evidence and data,
and supportive learning solutions via social, digital and blended
learning. Perhaps not all of this will be where you or your
organisational L&D currently resides, and that is fine -- it is not all
a pre-requisite, rather a store of practical tips and ideas to think
about and try.[]{#02_PART_P01.xhtml_page_8 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 8" role="doc-pagebreak"}
::::

[]{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

<div>

[]{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml_page_9 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 9"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[[01]{.ordinal
.ordinal}](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_03_CHAPTER_C01_sec_001)

# [Practical L&D](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_03_CHAPTER_C01_sec_001) {#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_h1_001 .title}

Setting the scene for L&D in modern practice, with some immediate ideas
to try

</div>

<figure id="_03_CHAPTER_C01_UFigure_1_1" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF001.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

There are a lot of lone L&D practitioners out there -- people who are
the only one with responsibility for this crucial function in their
organisation. There are also a lot of learning teams that are made up of
just two or three people. Even big, global organisations sometimes only
have a few Learning & Development professionals (L&Ders) in the
department. I know this because I am an L&Der. I have been that one
person taking care of the learning and development needs of a large,
globally-dispersed workforce. I have been an L&D consultant for several
years, working with practitioners, corporate clients, third sector and
public sector clients. Now I am at the Chartered Institute of Personnel
and Development (CIPD). I know what your world is like and I know that
it can be a very interesting, but sometimes puzzling place. It can be
particularly daunting, given that workplaces are changing fast, learning
is changing fast, and you need to be helping steer those changes. Hence
I am writing this book for us, for you.

I have done what you are doing, and I want to help you with the
challenges and issues you might be facing. Maybe you have some questions
you would like answers to. Hopefully you will find answers in this book.
I am very much a practical L&D person and it is that practical,
tried-and-tested L&D experience, thinking and suggested solutions that I
want to share with you in the following chapters.

[]{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml_page_10 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 10"
role="doc-pagebreak"}For me, it all started years ago with teaching
English in Japan, an experience that sparked my interest in helping
adults learn. Teaching English as a foreign language taught me some
great things about how to help people learn, because when you have a
language barrier you realise very quickly what does and doesn't work
when it comes to adult learning. Above all else, it taught me that you
can't just tell people stuff -- it will never land. You have to teach
them and teach them well.

With any situation, I always start by asking why -- why are we doing
this? Why learning? Why now? What is the problem that needs to be
solved? As an L&D practitioner, you should always ask this, because if
you can identify the business problem that needs to be solved it becomes
so much easier to identify what learning needs to happen, and how you
will know that the learning has both happened and made a difference.
Asking why enables you to identify who the audience is and how you will
engage with them to facilitate their learning in a way that meets their
needs. It's important to remember that each person needs a
differentiated experience to suit their personal needs.

There is a big problem that all we L&D folk need to solve at the moment
and it's this: face-to-face learning is no longer fit for purpose. It is
not efficient, effective, enjoyable or engaging; four very important
things that learning and development should be. As a result,
face-to-face has no place as a standalone piece in modern learning and
development, but for a lot of organisations it is still the go-to
option. Face-to-face still has validity, but it cannot be the only
option for busy working people who need to solve business problems as
they arise, not in accordance with a catalogue of courses.

Just because that's the way we have done it in the past shouldn't mean
that we have to keep on doing it this way, otherwise we are trying to
solve 21st century problems with an approach that dates back to the
1800s. It was in the 1800s that face-to-face learning was established as
the methodo­logy for workplace learning (as opposed to formal education,
which had been using face-to-face for years). At the time, face-to-face
would have been new and innovative, given the limited resources of books
and people. But times have moved on significantly since then. Consider
the shift in the meaning of an apprenticeship and the role they have
played across the ages -- once an apprentice swept the floor for a
couple of years to 'learn the job', now apprentices are doing degrees,
holding high levels of responsibility early in their careers and are on
fast upward trajectories.

Essentially, the problems that we are trying to solve have shifted
fundamentally, which means that the learning needs to shift as well.
It's no good []{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml_page_11 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 11" role="doc-pagebreak"}trying to solve new problems
with old technology. We need to use new technology with new
methodologies to solve our new problems. Never more has this been shown
to be true than during the 2020 global pandemic.

I want to help practitioners move away from offering face-to-face
learning as the default option. Let's be clear, this is not about
discarding face-to-face altogether, rather about embracing the best of
social and digital learning. I am writing this book in the midst of the
coronavirus outbreak, when individuals and organisations are having to
do things differently and face-to-face is not an option right now. These
are unprecedented times that I hope will prompt the sea change in
learning that needs to happen, not because of a global pandemic, rather
because that shift needs to happen to make learning more effective,
efficient, engaging and enjoyable for people needing to learn at work,
and because that shift is happening without L&D's involvement. Let's all
skip to the part where we are fundamentally involved, rather than left
on the sidelines.

<figure id="_03_CHAPTER_C01_UFigure_1_2" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF002.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

[Trying to solve new problems using old
technology](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_03_CHAPTER_C01_h3_001)

The historical approach to learning and development is the sage on the
stage, the teacher with a book and a brain full of knowledge that they
kindly transfer to their captive audience. I say 'historical' because
that approach is a thing of the past. At least, it should be, as it is
outdated and ineffective in our modern reality. Unfortunately, the sage
on the stage still holds strong for a lot of people. Even though we know
from successive Towards Maturity benchmark reports and Top Deck case
studies that this approach to L&D doesn't work that well, and there are
new technologies which serve learner and business needs much better, the
draw towards in-person learning is persistent.

A perpetuating problem is that trainers and learners like face-to-face,
whether it works or not. They like the 'trainer-tainment', the day out
of the office, the networking, the lunch and biscuits. Of course, I am
being extreme, but for some 'going on a course' is a welcome relief from
a relentless sea of work. The learning element is secondary to many
other aspects of the event.

[]{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml_page_12 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 12"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Now, it's important to repeat at this point that
face-to-face learning has a place, and I am not saying kick it out
altogether. It has huge value in certain scenarios -- imagine first aid
training without breathing into 'Resusci-Annie'. But face-to-face is no
longer the only solution and no-one should be promoting in-person
learning events without considering all the other options first. Due to
Covid-19, organisations have had to adapt. As an example of the art of
the possible, Girlguiding have taken 80 per cent of their refresher
First Response (first aid) programme online, leaving just the
face-to-plastic face Annie meeting to the physical
world[]{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_1_reference
.anchor}^[1](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_1)^.

What we need is for people to understand the options and to keep an open
mind about what the best solutions are. It may well be that you have a
problem that appears to require a face-to-face solution, but most likely
the more effective solution to that problem is face-to-face and digital.
It might even just require a simple printed job aid, such as a checklist
or instruction sheet; it doesn't need to be sophisticated. As learning
professionals, we simply have to think about the business problem we are
trying to solve and what the best way is to solve that problem, whilst
not being tempted to serve up what we have always served up because that
is the easiest choice. We need to stay innovative. For example,
providing training on software in an IT lab then expecting people to go
back to their day jobs and apply the learning is serving up new
technology with old training methods in a less than effective way. Did
those people not just need guidance on how to use the online help
function in the first place?

Something else you need to think about is the information stored in the
sage's head or in a book -- is that the only way you can access that
information? We have smartphones in our pockets which are wonderful
repositories of information, and it's all there, instantly available at
your fingertips whenever needed. We don't have one version of truth
stored in a person's brain: there are lots of truths (and lies) stored
on the Internet. We will discuss this more in [Chapters
6](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml) and [7](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml).

There are so many ways we can all access information now; so much so
that the problem can be one of information overload, or misinformation.
L&D can really add value here by sorting through what is useful or
valuable, and what is not. As a profession, we need to get better at
curating -- sorting through the noise so that our learners are able to
access the best learning available without getting sidetracked by a lot
of irrelevant stuff.

We also need to help learners learn how to use some of the technologies
that are on offer, such as Twurly and Anders
Pink[]{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_2_reference
.anchor}^[2](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_2)^, and
how to curate []{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml_page_13 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 13" role="doc-pagebreak"}effectively using tools such
as Twitter[]{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_3_reference
.anchor}^[3](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_3)^. As
I've already mentioned, as learning professionals we are here to
facilitate learning, as much as teach or train. We need to help people
find the knowledge they need. Sometimes that know­ledge comes from tech
and sometimes it comes from another person. With another person, I don't
mean the sage on the stage, more likely it will come from people within
your organisation, people with skills and knowledge to share. I will
come back to this later.

[Who are your
learners?](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_03_CHAPTER_C01_h3_002)

Having established your why, to get to the right learning you now have
to understand your audience. Who are your learners? What do they want
and need? Why do you call them learners? That is not really a term that
I like, but it is in common parlance and everyone understands it, so
I'll stick with it for this book, simply to describe people who need or
are undertaking some kind of learning experience.

You need to identify your learners and really focus on them in the
context of their work. Go to where they are to find out what it is that
they need help with. It might be that they already have the skills to
help themselves, but are time poor and thus aren't doing so. Or the
culture of the organisation may be such that it prevents them from
reaching out for help. Find out what is holding learners back and why.

Look at how people seek out bits of learning every day as they go about
their daily tasks. Think about what you do too. When you have a question
that needs answering, it is very normal and natural behaviour to search
the Internet, to ask the person sitting next to you, or to ask your
wider network of family and friends. Good Practice research reports
(Ferguson & Scott, 2016) indicate that this is how people learn every
day in their working lives. And why wouldn't they? It is, after all,
what we do all the time in our private lives. We don't just go on a
course when we want to know something -- we find other ways to get to
the information we need.

Let's look at the example of a young person, who we will call Lucy, who
wants to buy a car through the lens of the 3Rs framework discussed in
[Chapter
11](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml)[]{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_4_reference
.anchor}^[4](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_4)^. Before
she makes her car choice, Lucy goes and speaks to people who sell cars
(the required experts). She also reads trade magazines about cars (the
resources). She speaks to family and friends about the cars that they
have (the references). Lucy then thinks long and hard about everything
she has gathered, discussed and learnt (the reflections). These are all
[]{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml_page_14 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 14"
role="doc-pagebreak"}skills that she has honed in her private life.
Would we stop learners from using these same skills in their work life?
Why do we assume that learners need a course when the answers they need
to do their jobs could be all around them? Learning is everywhere. And
people are good at it.

Based on my experience, I would suggest that we need to stop pushing out
three-day courses to people, particularly if those people are massively
tech savvy. If we always offer 'the course' to people, they won't engage
with the learning that is potentially all around them. That is why it is
so critically important that you identify who your audience is and that
you meet them in a place that suits them. Isn't it our job in L&D to
help learners make sense of all their learning opportunities?

[Subject matter
experts](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_03_CHAPTER_C01_h3_003)

When you have identified your audience and their needs, then it is time
to identify who can help you in helping them. Look for the subject
matter experts in your organisation with a view to harnessing their
knowledge. These people are a fantastic resource, but in many
organisations they go untapped. L&D can support the release of their
knowledge into the wider community, but think about how it's going to
happen. Don't just assume that all you need to do is find the subject
matter experts, connect them with your learners, and leave them to it,
because that is unlikely to work. Even setting up informal lunchtime
learning get-togethers or 'lunch and learns', for example, needs
facilitation. Those experts could be absolutely brilliant at what they
do, but that doesn't necessarily mean they will be good teachers. Think
about professors at university or teachers at school; I bet you can
think of at least one who really knew their subject but whose lectures
were as dull as could be. Why? Because they couldn't relate what they
knew to the real world, they couldn't relate it to the exam or, more
importantly, make relevant sense of their knowledge to the learners in
front of them. It could be the same for your subject matter expert.

Being technically brilliant at a job doesn't mean you are skilled in
helping other people to learn. This is where we can help our experts. We
can bring all that we know about Adult Learning Theory, the neuroscience
of learning, what lands well in learning and the different methodologies
for learning. We can use all of that to help release the flow of
information from the heads of subject matter experts to the people that
need it. This makes us facilitators of learning, conduits of knowledge
transfer.

[]{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml_page_15 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 15"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[Line
managers](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_03_CHAPTER_C01_h3_004)

Never underestimate the importance of line managers -- they are our
allies when it comes to helping people learn, so we need them on board
with us. They hold people to account. They are people's cheerleaders,
including ours. They can help us understand need and context. They are
accountable for their team. Yet so many line managers often defer to L&D
regarding employee learning because they don't think that people
development is part of their job. Organisations need to change that
mentality because people development most definitely is part of a
manager's job -- how else can they be an ally, a cheerleader, or know
true context? Do they want their teams to stay static, never learning
and growing? Of course not, but line managers don't necessarily see that
sitting within their remit.

One of the things we can do to address development is to have good
conversations with senior teams to ensure they are encouraging line
managers to take responsibility for developing staff. Do we need key
performance indicators (KPIs) for people development? Quite possibly.
Even if just 5 per cent of a manager's time is given over to people
development, that could make a difference. And, of course, we need to be
talking to line managers too, encouraging them to get on board and take
responsibility for learning. This will be easier in some organisations
than others, as a lot depends on attitudes to learning. In some
organisations, a fundamental shift in company culture might be required
in order to get line manager buy in (we talk more about this in Chapter
10). Remember, this deferment of development to an L&D department is not
a fault of line managers themselves, rather a cultural norm hangover
from many years of learning culture in organisations, in much the same
way as default face-to-face.

There are practical things we can do to win line managers over to a
modern learning way of thinking and doing. The main thing is to solve
their pain points. If we can solve their business sticking points, solve
the things that stop them being successful, the things which have them
waking up in the middle of the night, they are going to be way more
engaged with us. More about this in Chapter 3, Stakeholder Engagement.

[Personal learning
network](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_03_CHAPTER_C01_h3_005)

Who else can help us? We can turn to our personal learning network, also
known as our PLN. These are the people in our network who perhaps
perform the same role as us in our organisation or, most often,
elsewhere. These []{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml_page_16 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 16" role="doc-pagebreak"}are the people we have
connections with and follow on spaces such as LinkedIn, Twitter and
Instagram. They might give TED talks that we like or we might see them
at conferences or networking events. These are the people who help
inform our thinking, who may challenge our learning philosophies, and
who will also encourage and support us to offer better L&D.

A lot of people in my PLN first connected with me during my #NoPlasters
campaign in
2015[]{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_5_reference
.anchor}^[5](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_5)^, when I
tweeted a tip every working day of the year on how to stop plastering
over the challenges of modern workplace learning, encouraging and
offering new ways of embracing L&D. The lesson here is that when you
give out content on social channels it can attract the attention of
people in your professional sphere. They will both agree and disagree
with you, as well as encourage and challenge you. There is a lot of
value in this. I talk more about this in Chapter 6, the chapter on
social learning, which is what learning with a PLN is all about.

With regard to your PLN, I would encourage you to think about what your
PLN currently looks like and whether you need to invigorate it. Your PLN
can help you to think about things differently and get new ideas, but
that may not happen if it's comprised of people who think like you and
work like you. Then it's just an echo chamber. Your PLN sometimes needs
to help you step out of your comfort zone. Find your tribe, but also get
out of your bubble to ensure a variety of voices.

How useful and robust is your network? If you are a face-to-face
trainer, for example, and that is all you've ever done, plus you only
interact with other face-to-face trainers who also only do the same, you
are only going to get influence around face-to-face training. This means
that you are unlikely to get any fresh thinking, which is not the route
to positive growth and successful change. If you are trying to move to a
social space, or you are trying to facilitate online for the first time,
then open up your network to people who can help and support you. Hang
around with people who do what you are looking to do, ask them for tips
and ideas, dive into conversations about what to do and what not to do.

It may seem out of place to mention PLNs in a chapter on setting the
scene for L&D; why care about wider networks outside your organisation?
I do so simply to make the point that it is not just L&Ders who have
networks. Everyone has networks -- some internal, some external, some
mixed. All the learners you are working for have their own go-to people.
You are in a sea of competing information and sources of information. If
you are not part of their network, you are irrelevant. They won't think
to ask you to help them, they will go to their network. We need to be of
value to our []{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml_page_17 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 17" role="doc-pagebreak"}organisations and the people
within it, just as our PLN needs to be of value to us.

[Demonstrating
value](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_03_CHAPTER_C01_h3_006)

L&D needs to get a lot better at demonstrating value. This is partly
because we don't do it enough, but mostly because we can be seen as a
nice-to-have, not a business critical function. Given the situation at
the time of writing this book, when we are almost certainly facing a
global recession, it has never been more important to demonstrate the
value of what we bring, because during times of economic downturn, L&D
is usually one of the first things to go out of a business. However, we
know that organisations that continue to invest in L&D during difficult
times are likely to perform better and reap the benefits in the long
term (Towards Maturity, 2019). Investing in your people and their
development helps with engagement, it helps with employee retention,
with people feeling valued, and it helps increase productivity. These
are all very important byproducts of what we do.

When it comes to L&D demonstrating value, we need to get a lot more
explicit. We need to make it easy for all of our stakeholders to see
what we bring to the table and how that will benefit them. It is up to
us to convince them of our worth, our value.

But how do we do that? We begin with evaluation; establishing where our
function is currently. Start with your own team, or, if you are a sole
L&D practitioner, with yourself. Do a skills audit, perhaps run a 360
degree review so that you get a more holistic, rounded view of where you
are at and identify any gaps. You have to get the data, because it will
show you and others what the situation is.

There are some really good benchmarking tools available which enable us
to run health checks against the wider organisation, such as the Emerald
Works Health Check (formerly known as the Towards Maturity
Benchmark)[]{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_6_reference
.anchor}^[6](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_6)^. You
can also take part in surveys such as the CIPD annual Learning and
Skills survey to get some generic results about where the L&D industry
is and, again, you can benchmark yourself against that data. There may
also be industry-specific benchmarks to get involved with, which can
help you understand your own industry's view of people development. One
L&D industry-specific survey is the Global Sentiment Survey run by
Donald H Taylor. It is a survey comprising one question about what is
'hot' in L&D. Participants working in L&D are invited to speculate using
their experience and insight. It offers a good pulse on our industry.

[]{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml_page_18 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 18"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Look inwards as well as outwards. Step out into
your organisation and have conversations with people about what their
perception is of L&D, what their expectations are, and, importantly,
what their desires are -- what is their L&D wish list? When you do this,
keep in mind that people will have their own frame of reference when
talking to you about how much they respect L&D and what their values and
expectations are. Some people will have had a negative experience of
education at school and so might not value learning generally. Other
people may have left school with little in the way of qualifications and
have worked their way up, so again may not see much value in formal L&D,
but may see on-the-job training as really valuable. Others might have
had a lacklustre experience of L&D at a previous organisation. You need
to speak to all these people and understand where they are coming from
and why. Do people only see you as the formal course offering, or do
they see you as adding value in informal learning spaces as well? It's
your job to find this out -- don't expect it to come to you -- so you
can take the data and the stories together to show L&D's value in your
organisation. Chapter 5 will support you more with this data-driven
approach.

You need to get a really strong sense of where your business departments
sit in relation to learning, including where your L&D department is too.
Are you on the supplier side in your organisation, selling courses in
what Andrew Jacobs, former L&D Transformation Lead at HM Revenue &
Customs, refers to as a shopkeeper
role?[]{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_7_reference
.anchor}^[7](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_7)^ Or are
you on the other side -- a facilitator, an engineer of learning
solutions? Of course, many organisations are neither one side nor the
other, but somewhere in between. Having conversations with people in
your organisation will help you decide where you are on this continuum
of learning.

Traditionally, L&D has demonstrated (or tried to demonstrate) the value
of interventions by counting: the number of courses run, the number of
people in chairs, training hours in a classroom or on a Learning
Manage­ment System (LMS), learning spend per employee, etc. What
reporting do you put out for L&D? Do you show value around what you are
offering in a way that speaks to the rest of the organisation? Or are
you counting and sharing numbers that have no meaning or value for
anyone other than the L&D department? If all you are doing is counting
learning hours, course numbers, professional spend, then you are likely
not counting the right stuff, as these are not the things that will
demonstrate true learning value.

Instead, you need to be counting things your business counts -- such as
increased turnover, increased sales, increased productivity, increased
employee engagement, employee retention -- and clearly link these
business measures back to being the result of learning interventions.
These more []{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml_page_19 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 19" role="doc-pagebreak"}formal and more business-like
KPIs and metrics are what people in business care about. They are the
metrics that can help you have more valid, constructive conversations in
your business to raise your profile and leverage for L&D, because only
then are you talking the language of your organisation. They don't care
about the number of training hours, because it's not a tangible value
that they can equate to bringing in more revenue or pleasing more
customers or making more products. How we measure our value needs to
reflect how organisations also measure business value.

[What's the
work?](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_03_CHAPTER_C01_h3_007)

The work you need to do once you have analysed where learning sits in
your organisation -- by identifying your audience, talking with your
audience, understanding why and how you need to demonstrate value -- is
about getting yourself ready to do some of the other things I talk about
in this book.

And it all starts with you. You need to identify what you need to do
personally. To do this you need to be very honest with yourself; honest
about the skills that you offer and the skills that you need to offer
but don't currently have. Don't be embarrassed to identify that you are
on a journey; we are all on a journey. Nobody should ever stop trying to
learn, particularly L&Ders, because we are the voice of learning! If we
aren't demonstrating and modelling good learning behaviour, why should
anyone in our organisation take us seriously, and why should we expect
them to demonstrate good learning behaviour?

So start your 'what's the work' journey with yourself. Identify where
you are on the continuum from 'shopkeeper' to
'engineer'[]{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_8_reference
.anchor}^[8](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_8)^ and
where your organisation needs to be for success. If you work in an
organisation that needs to push out a lot of mandated training because
you operate in a highly regulated sector, then you will need to gain an
understanding of how you can do that without getting in the way of the
work. When learning gets in the way of people's engagement and
productivity you will find yourself very unpopular.

As discussed earlier in terms of value, you also need to establish what
the L&D department needs to do to be successful. Perhaps a 360 review
across the department to identify what skills you have and don't have.
Consider the whole gamut of skills, knowledge and behaviours,
particularly to do with digital and social learning -- how to design a
virtual live class, how to run a webinar, how to use an LMS, how to
develop learning content, how to engage in and manage a social
community. These are all useful elements in moving towards modern L&D.
Know yourself, know your []{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml_page_20 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 20" role="doc-pagebreak"}audience, and know the
organisation. Only then will you understand the scene which is set for
you for modern practice in L&D.

<aside aria-label="Case-Study (1.1)" class="case-study" epub:type="case-study" id="_03_CHAPTER_C01_sec_002" role="complementary">

<figure id="_03_CHAPTER_C01_UFigure_1_3" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF003.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

The case study in this chapter supports the view that people can change
and grow, that people can be influenced, supported and challenged
positively by others, and, finally, that building your personal network
across the miles really can pay off. In setting the scene for your L&D
in modern practice, this case study relates to one person's journey to
become better. He started with himself and that resulted in a Learning
Technologies Award for his organisation. My sincere thanks to Kevin Maye
for sharing his story, for his kind words about me, and for engaging
with the Twitter campaign I ran to help the lone L&Der to feel less
alone by way of a daily practical L&D tip.

**GOOD THINGS FOUNDATION**

**by Kevin Maye**

Once upon a time (2015), in a land far, far away (Sheffield), a new
learning professional was struggling to develop the team he worked with.

Our hero had puzzled for many months, looking for ways to get his team
to challenge their existing thinking and ways of working.

Luckily for our hero, at around that time a wiser learning professional
was sharing insightful tips to help others.

#NoPlasters was a series of tips shared on Twitter. Each tip was based
on experience or evidence.

Getting tips like these is great for stretching your own knowledge and
understanding. But encouraging others to do the same isn't exactly
straightforward. It wasn't one of the tips, but 'you can't make people
think' is a truism.

But having a source of ideas and tips was a great way to start a
conversation. It took ownership of the idea away from any individual in
the team so that people could be honest.

Consider the difference

1.  As your manager, I want us to discuss 'learning styles'. Does the
    latest research change our view? Is there any value in considering
    learning styles in our work? Should we change anything we do?

2.  []{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml_page_21 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 21"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}I read this thing on the Internet that says
    learning styles aren't valid. What's our view, does it still have
    any value for our work, should we change anything we do?

Which of these questions is more likely to get an honest response? And
even if we don't agree with our colleagues' views, it's got to be better
to know about them.

#NoPlasters helped me establish my position with the team. Not just as
someone who knew about things to do with learning, but as someone who
was open to discussion. Someone who looked for evidence of what worked.
Crucially, as someone who would change what he did if needed.

That did a lot for my confidence. Enough that when Michelle was taking a
holiday and asked if anyone else would keep #NoPlasters going, I was one
of those people who stepped forward. Feeling the pressure of having to
share something each day made me appreciate the effort to do this for a
year way more.

Getting a positive response from the tips I shared was also a great
encouragement that I was on the right lines. That fed back into those
discussions with my team. Over the next two years, we discussed lots of
different learning theories and ideas.

The learning team at Good Things Foundation were already using
e-learning, downloadable print materials and online classes to support
people teaching and learning basic digital skills. But could we deliver
better quality? Had we lost track of our audience's needs?

Our discussions about learning theories led to changes in what we do, or
to recognising the positives in our existing practice. All those
discussions made it easier for my team to talk about and find ways to
deliver great learning.

So where did the hero of our story get to? Well, today I'm Head of
Learning at Good Things Foundation, where I'm working with some of the
biggest companies and smallest communities to deliver great learning
opportunities to people in the UK, Kenya and Australia. In 2018, the
team won the Learning Technology Award for Best Learning Team, so I'll
be forever glad I joined in with #NoPlasters.

**The Case Study Reflections**

*As with any of the case studies in this book, I encourage you to pause
and draw your own conclusions. However, in the spirit of a good PLN,
given you are now in mine, I offer you my reflections to consider after
you have paused for your own:*

-   *Kevin didn't go into his work looking to build his confidence; that
    came from open and honest discourse with his colleagues.*

-   *Kevin started from a position of curiosity. This is a really strong
    place to begin. He created curiosity in his team too, not by
    suggesting he had the answers, rather by stretching and challenging
    his own knowledge and understanding alongside them.*

-   []{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml_page_22 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 22"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}*This is quite a vulnerable position for a
    manager to take -- indeed, potentially a gamble when leading a team.
    However, curiosity and honesty seem to always prevail. I have seen
    this play out time and time again with my clients.*

-   *Looking for evidence takes the vulnerability away, as did the
    willingness to change if something wasn't working. It is easy to
    stick to our direction, but it is harder to say 'I was wrong, we
    need to change direction'. The example of learning styles, as Kevin
    mentions, is typical of an L&D u-turn which seems easier to stick to
    rather than facing the evidence and ditching them. Debunked for
    years, they don't seem to want to go away! (Wheeler, 2019)*

-   *The fact that simple conversations between Kevin and his team
    around suggestions made in tweets morphed into a behaviour to
    question and discuss what they were doing across broader aspects of
    their work, particularly in meeting their audience, reminds me that
    we never know where the next good idea will come from and how you
    can influence people. Working in L&D is quite a gift, as you can
    literally change people's lives. With great power should come great
    humbleness; this is the first case study for this reason. Use your
    power in L&D wisely.*

</aside>

<figure id="_03_CHAPTER_C01_UFigure_1_4" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF004.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_03_CHAPTER_C01_UFigure_1_9" class="figure"
aria-describedby="_03_CHAPTER_C01_UFigure_1_9_details">
<p><img src="content/images/M03UF001.png"
alt="The figure shows 4 clusters of factors." /></p>
<details id="_03_CHAPTER_C01_UFigure_1_9_details">
<summary>
Figure details
</summary>
<p>The factors are as follows:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Mindset: open-minded, willing to try new ideas, can-do attitude,
clarity on your organization’s goals in L and D, space to be
creative</p></li>
<li><p>Skillset: self-awareness, learning management strategy, business
acumen, interpersonal skills</p></li>
<li><p>Toolset: company strategy, benchmark reports, continued
professional development process, resources in this book’s library
lists</p></li>
<li><p>Dataset: organizational goals, K P I s, learner’s data, benchmark
data, L and D data.</p></li>
</ul>
</details>
</figure>

<aside aria-label="Tip (1.2)" class="tip" id="_03_CHAPTER_C01_sec_004" role="complementary">

<figure id="_03_CHAPTER_C01_UFigure_5" class="figure">
<p><span id="03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml_page_23" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 23" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF005.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_03_CHAPTER_C01_UTable_1_1" class="table">
<p><a href="#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_sec_006">Skip
table</a></p>
<div class="table" role="table" tabindex="0">
<table class="left">
<thead>
<tr>
<th scope="col"><p>Tweet</p></th>
<th scope="col"><p>Tips checklist</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><p>09-Jan-15 Grow your personal learning network #PLN in real life
&amp; online for support, ideas, chats. Try #LDinsight Fridays at 8am
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Grow a PLN</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>16-Jan-15 Start small. Try little improvements to assess results.
Focus on what can evolve. Try a ‘kaizen’ approach #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Try tiny trials</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>25-Feb-15 Don’t forget to look locally to network. Get great
ideas from people you live amongst rather than work with
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Network everywhere</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>23-Mar-15 Training is a part of learning, but don’t get hung up
on the words; use language your company can understand
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Mind your language</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>27-Apr-15 Seek to be better every day. Use your network, the
internet, inspiration from a walk. Believe in a better way
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Have better self-belief</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>08-May-15 Making use of networks can be inspiring. Don’t be
afraid to use Twitter to find like-minded people to chat to
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Find your tribe</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>09-Jun-15 Don’t use jargon or acronyms. Use the language of your
org to demonstrate how you can solve org’s issues #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Avoid L&amp;D jargon</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>25-Jun-15 Relive Open University TV progs from years ago by being
equally as pioneering in L&amp;D. Do things differently
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Be a pioneer</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>14-Jul-15 Bandwagons or the fear of missing out are wrong reasons
to change your workplace learning. Find your own needs
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Know your whys</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><span id="03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml_page_24" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 24" role="doc-pagebreak"></span>04-Sep-15 #LnDcowork
meets today from noon @ziferblat. It’s energising to spend time with
like-minded people. Try it. #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Co-work with your tribe</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>22-Oct-15 @DebbieEJones tip in #LSGwebinar get out there, it
really is a useful way to influence &amp; get messages across
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Get out of your bubble</strong></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
</figure>

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (1.3)" class="box" id="_03_CHAPTER_C01_sec_006" role="complementary">

<figure id="_03_CHAPTER_C01_UFigure_1_6" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF005.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Are you trying to use old technology to solve new problems?

-   What more do you need? What more does your organisation need?

-   Are you personally ready with the right set list to get started with
    modern, practical L&D?

-   Is your organisation interested in moving to a more modern approach
    to learning? If not, read on for more ways to prepare.

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (1.4)" class="box" id="_03_CHAPTER_C01_sec_007" role="complementary">

<figure id="_03_CHAPTER_C01_UFigure_1_7" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF007.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Start with you.

-   Join social channels to find your PLN, both digitally and in person.

-   Read more on helping adults learn.

-   Start asking 'why?' more often.

-   Start solving business problems with the right technology.

-   []{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml_page_25 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 25"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}Consider how you can use smartphones for
    learning.

-   Help people make sense of things with curation.

-   Get to know your learners.

-   Get to know your line managers and make them L&D allies.

-   Uncover the tacit knowledge in your organisation.

-   Understand the language of your business.

-   Be better at demonstrating the value of L&D by counting the right
    stuff.

-   Invest time in benchmarking.

</aside>

::: {#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_sec_008 .section .references .bibliography aria-label="References (1.6)" role="doc-bibliography"}
<figure id="_03_CHAPTER_C01_UFigure_1_8" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF008.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   CIPD (2020) Learning Theories for the Workplace, *CIPD* \[online\]
    [[www.cipd.co.uk/knowledge/strategy/development/learning-theories-factsheet]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.cipd.co.uk/knowledge/strategy/development/learning-theories-factsheet)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/S95A-CJQ5]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/S95A-CJQ5))

-   CIPD (2020) Learning Methods, *CIPD* \[online\]
    [[www.cipd.co.uk/knowledge/fundamentals/people/development/learning-methods-factsheet]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.cipd.co.uk/knowledge/fundamentals/people/development/learning-methods-factsheet)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/54LD-WUVX]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/54LD-WUVX))

-   Daly, J (2020) *Back to the Future: Why tomorrow's workforce needs a
    learning culture*, Emerald Works, London

-   Ferguson, O and Scott, S (2016) *Google It: The secret online lives
    of UK managers*, Good Practice, Edinburgh

-   Ferguson, O, Scott, S and Towersey, G (2017) *Learning Technologies:
    What managers really think*, Good Practice, Edinburgh

-   Ferguson, O, Scott, S and Towersey, G (2018) *The Evolution of
    70:20:10: Will L&D survive or thrive*, Good Practice, Edinburgh

-   Good Practice (2019) The Good Practice Podcast, Show 146, *Good
    Practice* \[online\]
    [[podcast.goodpractice.com/146-how-do-people-learn]{.url-hyperlink}](https://podcast.goodpractice.com/146-how-do-people-learn)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/SVV2-5LTT]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/SVV2-5LTT))

-   Taylor, D H (n.d.) Global Sentiment Survey, *donaldhtaylor.co.uk*
    \[online\]
    [[www.donaldhtaylor.co.uk/survey/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.donaldhtaylor.co.uk/survey/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/2Z9M-XPCB]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/2Z9M-XPCB))

-   []{#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml_page_26 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 26"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}Towards Maturity (2015) *Embracing Change:
    2015-16 Industry Benchmark Report*, Towards Maturity, London

-   Towards Maturity (2016) *Unlocking Potential: 2016-17 Learning
    Benchmark Report*, Towards Maturity, London

-   Towards Maturity (2018) *The Transformation Curve: Learning
    Benchmark Report*, Towards Maturity, London

-   Towards Maturity (2019) *The Transformation Journey: Today's
    learning strategy for tomorrow's business success*, Towards
    Maturity, London

-   Velez, A S (2020) A Critical Analysis Of Learning Styles and
    Pedagogy In Post-16 Learning, *Elearning Industry* \[online\]
    [[https://elearningindustry.com/critical-analysis-of-learning-styles-pedagogy-post-16-learning]{.url-hyperlink}](https://elearningindustry.com/critical-analysis-of-learning-styles-pedagogy-post-16-learning)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/N5LN-2E7U]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/N5LN-2E7U))

-   Wheeler, S (2019) *Digital Learning in Organizations*, Kogan Page,
    London
:::

::: {#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_sec_009 .section .endnotes aria-labelledby="_03_CHAPTER_C01_h1_009"}
# Notes {#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_h1_009 .title}

[1](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_1_reference)
Girlguiding First response training information,
[[www.girlguiding.org.uk/making-guiding-happen/learning-and-development/information-for-trainers/training-resources/1st-response-training-resources/]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.girlguiding.org.uk/making-guiding-happen/learning-and-development/information-for-trainers/training-resources/1st-response-training-resources/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/2N55-KDWD]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/2N55-KDWD))

[2](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_2_reference) Content
curation for learning,
[[https://anderspink.com/]{.url-hyperlink}](https://anderspink.com/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/8JBH-FVXW]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/8JBH-FVXW))

[3](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_3_reference)
Micro-blogging site,
[[https://twitter.com/home]{.url-hyperlink}](https://twitter.com/home)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/6AZW-6NS4]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/6AZW-6NS4))

[4](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_4_reference) A video
of Lucy's story is at
[[www.kairosmodernlearning.co.uk/]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.kairosmodernlearning.co.uk/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/3S6E-5ZFH]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/3S6E-5ZFH))

[5](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_5_reference)
[[www.kairosmodernlearning.co.uk/2015/01/05/2015-the-how-of-doing/]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.kairosmodernlearning.co.uk/2015/01/05/2015-the-how-of-doing/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/3S6E-5ZFH]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/3S6E-5ZFH))

[6](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_6_reference)
[[www.emeraldworks.com/research/learning-health-check]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.emeraldworks.com/research/learning-health-check)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/Y6LJ-WKZN]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/Y6LJ-WKZN))

[7](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_7_reference) Andrew
Jacobs' blog
[[www.lostanddesperate.com/2018/08/31/shopkeeper-to-engineer/]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.lostanddesperate.com/2018/08/31/shopkeeper-to-engineer/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/NTE6-EFAT]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/NTE6-EFAT))

[8](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml__03_CHAPTER_C01_Endnote_1_8_reference) Andrew
Jacobs' blog,
[[www.lostanddesperate.com/2018/08/31/shopkeeper-to-engineer/]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.lostanddesperate.com/2018/08/31/shopkeeper-to-engineer/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/NTE6-EFAT]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/NTE6-EFAT))
:::

[]{#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

<div>

[]{#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml_page_27 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 27"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[[02]{.ordinal
.ordinal}](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_04_CHAPTER_C02_sec_001)

# [Strategy for L&D](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_04_CHAPTER_C02_sec_001) {#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml__04_CHAPTER_C02_h1_001 .title}

Looking taller and wider -- building L&D from a business strategy

</div>

<figure id="_04_CHAPTER_C02_UFigure_2_1" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF001.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

We L&D professionals are brilliant solutioneers. We are great ideas
people and we love coming up with ways to help people learn better. It's
our happy place really, and it's easy to see why; who doesn't like
coming up with solutions to problems? It's very tempting to jump
straight in when a learning need arises. But L&D professionals need to
learn to take a step back (or several steps back really) and take a more
considered, questioning approach to create sustainable solutions with
longevity of impact. If we don't, what we get is a temporary fix, a
patch-up job, a plaster over a problem; coming up with the ideas is
actually the easy bit, but ultimately they are just plasters, not
sustainable long-term learning. This is why I called my tweet campaign
#NoPlasters. Doing the hard graft of establishing the basis for
solutions is much harder and, let's face it, you don't get the instant
gratification that you get when you take a solutioneering approach.

In order for learning solutions to be effective, in the short and the
long term, they have to be grounded in reality. They need to be
explicitly designed and implemented to meet organisational needs. This
means, as I am sure you have already guessed from the title of the
chapter, that they have to be aligned to your company strategy.

Let me say that again, just to be clear. Learning solutions have to be
aligned to your company strategy. They also need to be aligned to your
[]{#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml_page_28 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 28"
role="doc-pagebreak"}learning strategy, but what is your learning
strategy aligned to if not your company strategy? The evidence offered
in the CIPD's 2020 *Learning and Skills at Work* report suggests that
L&D do not always have a strategy, let alone one linked to their
organisational strategy.

> 'Align your learning and development strategy with organisational
> need: If learning is to positively impact business performance, it has
> to get much closer to the business and there needs to be greater
> clarity in the learning team about business drivers.' (CIPD, 2020)

Everything you do has to hang off your company strategy, which has the
bonus of gaining line manager buy-in. I know I have just repeated the
same thing several times, but actually it cannot be said frequently
enough because it is so important. So many L&D professionals still
plough on creating learning interventions that are not aligned to
anything; they are reactive solutions to solve immediately presented
problems. They look great and they sound great, but perhaps they don't
land because they are not rooted in the business reality.

What L&D needs to do is step out of the L&D space and step into the
wider organisation. I would suggest that L&D put a business-focused,
strategic hat on. We should actually be wearing that hat all the time,
but never more so than when thinking about our learning strategy. The
CIPD's 2019 report *Professionalising Learning and
Development*[]{#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml__04_CHAPTER_C02_Endnote_2_1_reference
.anchor}^[1](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml__04_CHAPTER_C02_Endnote_2_1)^ reminds
us that our L&D skills sit within a wider professional framework, just
as our L&D strategy sits within a wider strategy.

If you haven't thought about your company strategy in any detail before,
now is definitely the time to start doing it. Do you even know what the
company strategy means in real terms? You might be able to reel off the
obvious stuff -- the company mission, vision and values, for example --
but have you thought about what that means on the ground, what that
means for employees, and what that means for you as an L&D professional?
There are several things to consider here. How and why is your company
strategy formulated? Who is involved in formulating the strategy? Are
you close to them? Can you get in front of them and really understand
their intent? What are the drivers, the objectives, the ideas behind the
thinking? Take a deep dive into all of this and give your brain cells a
good workout getting the bigger picture clear in your mind.

[]{#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml_page_29 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 29"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Whatever profession you are in, whether it's L&D,
finance, sales, marketing or something else, it is easy to get stuck in
the day-to-day and lose sight of the bigger picture. If you feel there
is a disconnect between what you are doing and what the business is
doing, then it's up to you to address that. This is why we need to look
taller and wider, specifically beyond our L&D work, to see what our
organisation is up to, indeed, what the market and our industry is up
to.

Talk to people around the business about how they view the company
strategy. Talk to senior leaders and key players, and be sure to talk to
a variety of employees as well. What do they all think is important?
What is important to them? What are the obstacles to knowledge, skills,
development? Where do they need to be more agile? You need to establish
your view of the company strategy, the company's view of it, and the
view of people in the organisation to get a well-rounded, holistic
approach. This kind of data will be really useful to you going forward,
and not just in terms of company strategy, but also in how top-down or
bottom-up your organisation is. This can help you see who has influence
and how much. Remember that the closer you are to the business, the more
successful the solutions you can provide.

Take an evidence-based approach to all of this. You need to be really
thorough and objective in your evidence gathering, asking lots of good
questions -- probing questions and open-ended questions. Listen well and
ask more questions, based on what you get back. By asking your
stakeholders good questions and gathering lots of data, you will get to
those more successful solutions. When I started at one company, I spent
three months on the front line to gather insights into the real work.
Doing the job, I was later to deliver learning solutions that, without
doubt, matched the strategic needs of the company and made the learning
more impactful for those frontline stakeholders.

Get your metaphorical deerstalker hat on, just like Sherlock Holmes, and
start doing detective work around your organisation. Arets *et al*
(2015) recommend detective work in learning in their book *70:20:10
Towards 100% Performance*. Sherlock Holmes is a brilliant example of
someone who went beneath the surface, who asked the right questions, and
was able to find out what was really going on. How can L&D be better
detectives? At all costs, avoid being a solutioneer. Be a critical
friend instead.

<figure id="_04_CHAPTER_C02_UFigure_2_2" class="figure">
<p><span id="04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml_page_30" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 30" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF002.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

[Becoming
strategic](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_04_CHAPTER_C02_h3_001)

If L&D is to make the move away from being a course provider and an
order taker, then we have to get a lot more strategic in both our
thinking and our operating. We cannot operate in a vacuum, which means
we need to think and to talk in business terms. We need to gain support
in particular from middle leaders, as they are crucial to the successful
embedding of learning. All this starts with understanding company
strategy: what it means from an organisational perspective, from an
operational perspective, and from an L&D perspective. And we need to
ensure those perspectives are aligned. This is unfamiliar territory for
some L&D people, but if they can get to grips with company strategy and
how it relates to learning strategy, then they are building very good
foundations for learning success going forward. And if they don't? They
are not going to get to the learning solutions that solve their
organisation's problems. This is not to say they are bad at L&D
solutions; they are likely to provide excellent point-of-need learning
offers. However, they are less likely to be adding strategic value and
could be seen as a 'nice to have' in times of trouble or downturn.

[What is the company strategy and what do we do with
it?](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_04_CHAPTER_C02_h4_001)

Let's start with the basics. What is the purpose of a company strategy,
and why is it important? A company strategy outlines why a company is in
existence, what it is trying to achieve, and the direction of travel. It
is essentially the company's purpose for being. L&D needs to be tuned
into and on board with this purpose. We have to align what we do -- and
this means everything that we do -- to the organisational strategy. An
integrated and successful L&D strategy is determined by the
organisational strategy. It's not the same strategy, but the governing
drivers, objectives and principles need to be aligned.

<aside aria-label="EXAMPLE (2.1)" class="example" epub:type="practice" id="_04_CHAPTER_C02_sec_002" role="complementary">

[]{#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml_page_31 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 31"
role="doc-pagebreak"}EXAMPLE

Girlguiding is a membership organisation, existing to serve girls and
young women. This is done via adult volunteers, including myself as a
local unit Guide Leader and national Lead Volunteer for L&D.
Girlguiding's 2020+ strategic vision highlights a framework which
focuses first on the young members, then on the volunteers, and next on
wider society in terms of removing barriers so that girls and women can
thrive. For volunteer L&D to be successful in Girlguiding, it must link
directly back to these beneficiaries and aims in Girlguiding's L&D
strategy.

One tangible example of Girlguiding's strategy in action is ramping up
the use of webinars during the 2020 pandemic. The Girlguiding Volunteer
L&D team's approach is to reach more volunteer leaders through
additional ways of learning. The team increased its number of volunteer
webinar trainers by more than 200 during 2020. Webinars were used to
teach volunteers new skills on how to use Zoom effectively. This
empowered the volunteers to deliver online Guiding whilst they could not
deliver face-to-face. Using webinars as a methodology is both highly
effective as a learning transfer tool, and also offers an opportunity
for a meta learning experience by demonstrating good online practice
that participants can see and feel themselves -- being in the learning
is the learning. The learning enabled Guiding Units to continue to be
there for members, giving girls a voice, confidence, and a regular
activity during lockdown, while supporting volunteers to make a positive
difference and giving all the ability to thrive. In addition, this all
helped to normalise the use of digital learning within Girlguiding.
These outcomes all speak directly to the three elements of the
organisational strategy, and also fulfilled the L&D strategy of adding
to the learning provision with the introduction of webinars, plus
helping the business case towards digital learning.

</aside>

This example of L&D strategy tangibly linking from organisational
strategy to L&D strategy shows exactly why L&D strategy cannot stand
alone. There is a strong and symbiotic relationship between
organisational strategy and departmental strategy. Girlguiding volunteer
L&D needs were to use Zoom effectively to carry on Guiding. What better
way to learn how to deliver live online than being live online, seeing
how it is done, and reaching many people at once? The volunteer L&D team
has long been keen to broaden the range of delivery methods for learning
offered to volunteers []{#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml_page_32 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 32" role="doc-pagebreak"}from face-to-face to reach
more volunteers. In 2017, the team had an image of this strategic intent
drawn up to help us communicate strategy -- strategy does not always
need to be written down to be understood; a picture paints a thousand
words.

<figure id="_04_CHAPTER_C02_Figure_2_1" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M04NF001.png"
alt="The figure shows a map through a forest." /></p>
<details id="_04_CHAPTER_C02_Figure_2_1-details">
<summary>
Figure 2.1 details
</summary>
<p>There are three people standing in various locations on the map
route. An inset image shows a backpack and a stack of bundles. The upper
left is labeled lake of informal learning. The map ends at a tent
labeled 20 20 base camp with four flags labeled voice, capacity,
excellence, and access. The labeled bundles are distributed along the
map routes.</p>
</details>
<p>SOURCE: drawn by Simon Heath</p>
<figcaption><p><a
href="#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml#loi_04_CHAPTER_C02_Figure_2_1"><span
class="label">Figure</span> <span class="ordinal">2.1</span> Girlguiding
L&amp;D Strategy Map</a></p></figcaption>
</figure>

This image has been shared internally with stakeholders to recognise the
strong road well-travelled by face-to-face trainers and the desire to
diversify []{#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml_page_33 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 33" role="doc-pagebreak"}to reach more volunteers with
learning. The image helps presentations of the strategy to be
envisioned, which is crucial in stakeholder comms, as images can act as
better memory triggers than words.

You may think you know your company strategy already, but do you really
know it? Just being able to list off the mission, vision and values from
the posters around the office is not the same as knowing the strategic
plan, even though they are all inextricably linked -- or at least should
be! Set aside some time to read any strategy documents (including all
departments or subsections of your organisation) and then reflect back
on what you have read. Do you understand everything? Does it all make
sense for you? If not, don't assume that's because you lack the skills.
It might be that the strategic plan is ambiguous or overly complicated
or overloaded with technical jargon, so if you don't understand it,
don't be embarrassed to ask for clarity. It's better to ask and know you
have understood everything than to leave your questions unanswered and
hope for the best. The second approach could come back to bite you if
you aren't careful.

[Examine strategy
carefully](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_04_CHAPTER_C02_h4_002)

Once you have the strategy clear in your mind, interpret it through a
variety of lenses -- what does this mean for staff, customers, clients,
volunteers, suppliers. (whoever is in your context)? Then, and only
then, interpret it through an L&D lens. For example, if your
organisation's strategy is to expand into six countries, that is simple
enough to understand. But what does that mean for learning? How will L&D
support and facilitate that growth? How will you make good learning
decisions? Think about the logistics, such as language, cultural
differences, learning cultures, etc. How will learning help that
strategy become reality? Interpret the strategy lens through the eyes of
other functions as well -- what does growing into six countries mean for
sales, for IT, for internal comms? All of these functions will have
learning needs based on the strategic growth plan.

It's important to remember that L&D should never operate in isolation.
We are an essential part of our organisation and what we do touches
every part of that community. A lot hinges on people development being
part of the bigger picture, and an L&D strategy needs to reflect that.
It may sound easy, but a lot of learning teams still lack a strategic
focus and act as if L&D is a separate entity, which is a reactive 'order
takers' point of view. That has to change if L&D is to remain relevant
in modern times.

When learning is a standalone piece and isn't aligned to company
strategy, it is unlikely to land successfully in the longer term. That
is when []{#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml_page_34 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 34"
role="doc-pagebreak"}learning teams become peripheral and when learning
is a nice-to-have, rather than a business imperative. It is so important
that the work we do is embedded in the strategic intent of the
organisation because that is when it has meaning, value and impact. As
mentioned earlier in the chapter, L&D departments should never be a
'nice-to-have' or we are doing it wrong.

<aside aria-label="EXAMPLE (2.2)" class="example" epub:type="practice" id="_04_CHAPTER_C02_sec_003" role="complementary">

EXAMPLE

Let's consider a situation. Say the strategic intent of a company is to
win more large corporate customers. What does that mean for people
working in L&D and what does it mean for people around the organisation?
You need to take that statement of intent -- grow more large corporate
customers -- and consider how L&D can help convert that into reality.
Who do you need to speak to in the organisation? Are there already
pockets of activity that you can build on? Who has experience of large
corporates? Who doesn't? What else needs to be done? Think about
Marketing, for example, as they are bound to be involved in a drive to
increase customers. Do the people in Marketing have the right skills and
mindset to make it happen? What are they trying to achieve and how? What
are their obstacles and how can you help overcome them? What is their
marketing strategy to fulfill the organisational goal? It is likely that
growing more large corporate customers will not be directly achieved by
going on a course for any staff in any department without context,
reflection, sense-making and action-taking that goes beyond that
learning course. Rather than a course, perhaps fulfillment of that
strategic intent via L&D looks like a roundtable event of
cross-department participants, creating a culture of questions and
innovation, encouraging research into large corporate customer
competitors, and learners identifying their gaps following this
preparatory piece of work? Looking at the required knowledge, skills and
behaviours of the teams to serve those new customers will be a better
match of strategies than traditional reactive, course-booking L&D, who
simply need to be in on the conversations much earlier than in the past.

</aside>

[Maintaining a strategic
focus](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_04_CHAPTER_C02_h4_003)

Thinking strategically requires a change in mindset and focus for many
L&D professionals. It requires us to look outwards and inwards at the
same time, thinking about strategy and learning from the point of view
of every []{#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml_page_35 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 35" role="doc-pagebreak"}part of the organisation. To
do this, you need to get out there and spend time in the business, on
the ground. You need to really understand your organisation from every
perspective. It doesn't matter what sector you work in -- be it
healthcare, finance, technology or something else -- you have to
understand your sector and your organisation inside out. Once you have
that knowledge and understanding, only then can you start to know how to
help the people in the organisation and how to help the organisation
overall. Simply sitting in the canteen / open spaces / coffee area, or
'going back to the floor' and work shadowing for a day in different
departments, all whilst wearing your strategy hat, can help you to see
whether the organisation lives the strategy. Or are they caught up in
the day job? Do they live the mission? Do they talk about the values? Or
do they talk about something completely different?

If you don't know your organisation in this way, it's easy to slip up on
both the big things and the small things. This may sound obvious, but
you would be surprised how often learning interventions fail because
they don't take into account the obvious, such as working patterns and
the basic requirements of learners; for example, offering digital
learning for employees who do not have digital devices, or not knowing
that some of the people in your organisation work across 24-hour shifts
and designing an L&D strategy that works on a 9 to 5 basis, which is
never going to work for everyone. As a consultant, I worked with a large
UK airport who were proud of their onsite learning building, but they
had a business challenge in getting some cohorts to attend learning
programmes physically taking place there. 60 per cent of their staff
worked outside of the building's operating hours of 9 to 5, so they were
invited on their off days in lieu of time off later on. The learning
team never followed up with line managers about that additional time off
and they had regularly poor attendance, especially of those coming off a
night shift. The strategy of the learning team to have a building
purpose-built to focus on the delivery of learning had good intent -- it
was a great building, really light and airy, a fabulous environment for
learning in. However, having learning in a specific geographical
location which had limited opening hours was simply not aligned to the
strategy of a 24-hour operation. Instead, we designed a learning offer
which was completed around the airport, in the flow of work. It is the
obvious things which get lost in the micro work, and only become
apparent in macro light when you step back and shine that light on all
the elements of a business (more on macro / micro work later).

[]{#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml_page_36 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 36"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[Talking the language of your
business](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_04_CHAPTER_C02_h3_005)

Understanding the business means more than simply understanding the type
of commercial operation you are in; rather, it is about how the company
strategy is expressed in its company culture. The language you hear
around the workplace can give you clues about the real language of your
business. Talking to different colleagues across the business, what
kinds of words do you hear repeated? Sit in the canteen, listen, and
talk to people. Book meetings with people and go with an open, empty
mind to absorb the way they describe strategy and culture. It is easy to
make assumptions about what matters to people, especially employees,
because ultimately you are likely to be one yourself too. Listen well
and you may find that those assumptions are incorrect due to your own
experiences and bias. Listen to what people are saying and how they are
saying it. You will learn an awful lot by having your ear to the ground,
hearing what people constantly refer back to, what their gripes are, and
what the glue is that holds them together.

If you work in a customer-driven organisation, then everybody could be
talking about net promoter scores -- how do we improve our net promoter
score? Where are the holes? What can we do better? What are the
customers' complaints? What are the opportunities to please more
customers? These are all great places you can investigate to seek to
support. Complaints, in particular, are a perfect source of real
learning need.

If you work in a financial organisation, then the main topics of
conversation are likely to be around profit, mark up, margins,
EBITDA[]{#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml__04_CHAPTER_C02_Endnote_2_2_reference
.anchor}^[2](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml__04_CHAPTER_C02_Endnote_2_2)^, taxes,
etc. What are people saying? What are they not saying? For
finance-driven organisations, you need to interpret your strategy to
support making money. Be curious about return on learning investment.
Show your impact on profit and make sure learning value always has a
number.

If you work in a people-centric organisation, you will hear about perks
and holidays, about peer-to-peer learning, and supportive teams.
Learning interventions need to be social, to be in the flow of work, to
be non-competitive and supportive.

Whatever the burning issues are, that's where your learning solutions
need to be. That's your business context. Let's go back to net promoter
score (NPS) in the context of strategic growth in a customer-driven
organisation. As an L&D department, you need to make sure that strategic
growth fits well with the customer journey and that all processes and
interactions are as smooth and positive as they can be. There are likely
to be some learning needs that we could guess at. I'm sure we'd make
decent guesses: how to []{#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml_page_37 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 37" role="doc-pagebreak"}alleviate customer complaints,
how to engage with customers, or how to grow your customer base. We will
only know if these are the issues that matter to people if we are close
to and engage with teams around the business. What does the department
do around NPS? Are there KPIs around NPS? Is it largely a data gathering
exercise without action? You will only know where to put your learning
strategy if you know what people care most about within your corporate
strategy, and how that manifests in reality.

L&D needs to be able to converse with and support all the different
departments within an organisation in a way that is credible and
effective. L&D needs to understand the business context and the cultural
context and to be able to demonstrate that to different stakeholders. If
you can demonstrate you are thinking strategically, you are going to
find it much easier to get buy-in from people -- more on this in
[Chapter 3](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml) -- and find it easier to prove value.
David Hayden gives a great example of how other departments are better
than L&D at linking their work to business success in his blog of
November 2019. He suggests that Marketing willingly link their leaflet
campaign to the success of opening new accounts, while L&D (who have
taught the staff how to open those accounts) are not quite so quick to
call out that they also contributed to success.

Understanding organisational needs and objectives gives you the
foundations on which to build strategic learning solutions. This quote,
attributed to the French novelist and journalist Antoine de
Saint-Exupery, illustrates beautifully what I am saying here: 'If you
want to build a ship, don't drum up people to collect wood and don't
assign them tasks and work, but rather teach them to long for the
endless immensity of the sea.'

Consider that quote within the context of L&D. What does it say to you?
For me, it says don't just build courses, don't just put people on
e-learning, don't just give people point-of-need solutions. First, help
people understand how they and their learning impacts on the bigger
picture. Learners need to understand what the whole organisation is
working towards, just as you need to understand it. They need to want to
learn in order to play their part in fulfilling the company strategy.
The motivation to learn is stronger if people understand why they are
doing it, if people can 'long for the endless immensity of' company
success.

[Macro thinking versus micro
thinking](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_04_CHAPTER_C02_h3_006)

This is the difference between micro and macro thinking. Micro thinking
is when people are focused purely on what they are doing and what they
see []{#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml_page_38 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 38"
role="doc-pagebreak"}in front of them. It is most definitely not bigger
picture thinking. It's the here and now and it doesn't relate to what
other people and other departments in the organisation are up to now.
Nor does it look forward beyond the now. The mentality is, 'I can
operate and control this bit of ground. I am doing my job here and now.'

Macro thinking is completely different. It's not 'me and this bit of
ground and the things that I can control'. It's about how my role, my
efforts, and my focus fit in with and contribute to organisational goals
now. While there is still focus on the present, and on what is within
our direct control, people also have an eye to the future impact and to
the wider issues. Understand your priorities and how they fit with the
priorities of other parts of the organisation. A symbiotic approach
means your 'now tasks' can ensure future tasks can also be completed.
You and your piece of ground are just one piece of a much larger puzzle
of overall success.

Traditional L&Ders, as transactional order takers, have a tendency to
think micro. We see this in typical success measures: number of
e-learning completions, number of learning hours, etc., rather than
impact on the bottom line, increase in sales, or reduction in staff
attrition measures (discussed further in [Chapter
5](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml)).

My belief is that when L&D thinks macro, amazing things can happen.
Reading, understanding and interpreting the company strategy pushes us
into the macro zone. It gives the business context that has to inform
what happens next. It means that we can get involved in conversations
sooner, we can anticipate and be proactive. We can offer the right
learning solution at the right time for the right people.

<aside aria-label="EXAMPLE (2.3)" class="example" epub:type="practice" id="_04_CHAPTER_C02_sec_004" role="complementary">

EXAMPLE

Your organisation produces goods in a factory and that factory's mission
is to produce more goods. To do that, the strategic intent is to switch
the machines on 24/7. They have to hire more staff to make the switch to
24 hour production. L&D need to provide some learning as a result of new
onboarding. The business context here is that L&D need to provide
learning within the flow of work. We cannot pull people off the
production line for extended training sessions, yet we need new hires up
to speed as soon as possible. If you have a micro mindset, you design a
learning intervention that involves people coming off the machines for a
day of learning; it will simply never happen and you have just set
yourself up for failure. I know that people always talk about
[]{#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml_page_39 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 39"
role="doc-pagebreak"}learning from failure and I agree that it's a good
thing, but you need to avoid this kind of failure at all costs,
particularly when it is so avoidable. Macro thinking means you will
understand the major impact of pulling people off a line. You will know
what times shifts change. You will know the shift managers. You will
understand there are perhaps two better learning solutions than to pull
people into the classroom: first, QR code videos on each machine for in
flow, point of need support plus learning expert buddies on each shift
to support machine understanding, and second, to pay the shift workers
an additional half an hour to come in early on their shift for a run
through on the machines.

</aside>

Clearly, there could be other solutions, but that is not really the
point here. The point is that macro thinking is massively important in
terms of providing strategic value. To achieve it, you have to
understand the direction, the flow, the mission, vision and values of
the organisation, and how what you do is fundamentally woven into the
activities and objectives of all the other organisational departments.

[Starting from a position of
strength](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_04_CHAPTER_C02_h3_007)

When you take yourself out of the minutiae and into thinking more
strategically you are able to see what is missing and where the gaps
are. You get a picture of the organisation from a cultural perspective,
from a mission perspective, and from a reality perspective. This enables
you to start your strategic learning interventions from a place of
strength. You have the data that you need to go forward.

Some of this spills into the world of organisational development (OD).
OD offers a holistic approach to developing organisations and is
definitely in the realms of macro thinking. There is a fair bit of
crossover between OD and L&D, and learning practitioners who can draw on
OD principles and ideas more likely to be successful. I am not saying
that L&D and OD are one and the same, because they are not.
Fundamentally, OD is about developing an entire organisation, whereas
L&D is about developing people and skills within an organisation. Those
two things are different but have increasingly blurred boundaries as L&D
evolves into a space which is looking taller and wider. Think about job
roles, for example. If OD is busy creating or redefining job roles, then
it is up to L&D to help those job roles come alive and for people to
grow in their role, perhaps as a person starts that job or even earlier.

[]{#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml_page_40 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 40"
role="doc-pagebreak"}OD creates a working culture where the whole is
more than the sum of its parts. It encompasses strategy, workplace
design, workforce planning, company culture and purpose. OD exists to
change activities and outputs, behaviours and outcomes. Historically, it
can be said of training that the focus is on skills change and is
nothing to do with behaviour change. How­ever, as an L&D practitioner I
completely disagree with that approach. For me, this is one fundamental
difference in the language of training and learning. People need to be
able to take the skills they learn and to apply them in their business
context. Very often this does require behaviour change. So, in the same
way training has looked taller and wider to become L&D, now L&D is
looking towards OD. If learning professionals understand OD principles,
even on a basic level, it can help establish a more holistic approach to
L&D, one that is firmly rooted within the wider business strategy. The
disciplines are clearly different, but have interdependencies.

This approach of understanding the bigger picture to get results is
replicated throughout organisations. Say L&D needs to focus on
leadership development because the strategy says that the organisation
needs to grow strong leaders, but L&D only focuses on the leaders and
neglects to consider the people being led. Then you are only considering
one part of the picture. There is a lot you can learn from the people
being led -- what their challenges and needs are, for example, and how
this fits with what leaders need to learn.

[String
theory](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_04_CHAPTER_C02_h3_008)

String theory is a theoretical framework in physics around dimensions in
space. It may seem odd to consider this in respect of learning strategy,
yet I reason that using strategy as the foundation of the work for L&D
practitioners is a kind of string theory. I can't pretend to go into the
actual science here, of course, as I work in L&D, not physics. I am
certain this is not a direct analogy. However, there are metaphorical
parallel correlations. The fundamentals of string theory are that
dimensions operate on a string which weaves through space and interact
with each other through gravitation, magnetism, strong force and weak
force. The corporate and leadership dimensions are the space of an
organisation -- maybe not physically, especially with more people
working from home now, but there are these forces in operation within
these spaces. Thinking about the interaction of such forces helps us
layer up strategy within an organisation. Who are the gravity-pulling
people? Who are the magnetic people that go to other people? Who
[]{#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml_page_41 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 41"
role="doc-pagebreak"}are the repelling magnetic people that pull away?
Who are the strong pushing forces within an organisation, and who are
the less strong ones?

All these forces are at work every day in your organisation. Add in
bias, assumptions, interpretations and strategy and you have a mess of a
space. We all need to navigate in that mess to be successful. Physical
space is littered with old satellites, bits of space junk, former space
rockets with stories of space walks and fantastical trips. It is just
the same in your organisation. History is floating around, getting in
the way of progress, change and endeavours. You need to know it and
acknowledge it to avoid it pulling on the wrong strings.

Can you see then, as tenuous as the metaphor may be, how the four forces
of string theory can influence strategic thinking? We know that
organisations have a strategy and a direction, and the statement of that
direction should be set out in the mission, vision and values. L&D needs
to know all of this and be part of the thinking and needs to help it all
come to life for employees. You do this by having really good
conversations with people so that they understand the direction the
business is going in, and why. If people know their why, and that why
sits within the company's why, then happy days, learning can work more
effectively for the greater good.

It may come as news to L&D people that they need to know about company
strategy, micro and macro thinking and string theory; however, my
argument is these topics are important in so far as how they can help
you offer better learning. Learning does not exist in splendid
isolation.

<aside aria-label="CASE-STUDY (2.4)" class="case-study" epub:type="case-study" id="_04_CHAPTER_C02_sec_005" role="complementary">

<figure id="_04_CHAPTER_C02_UFigure_3" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF003.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

The case study in this chapter focuses on the crossover between
strategic intent and the work it takes to apply strategy within
organisations. At a time of incredible love and support for health
services all over the world, we are all aware of the challenges
healthcare providers face. Globally, healthcare systems have been
stretched to the limits, all doing their best with what they have. This
case study from Vancouver-based Providence Health Care is about the
preparation that goes into making strategy happen; in this case, the
implementation of digital medical record keeping. Shared
[]{#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml_page_42 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 42"
role="doc-pagebreak"}with me in a telephone interview (before
coronavirus), Katherine Marlow, Director of Mission, Leadership and
Organisational Change told me of the drivers and actions taken in the
preparation for change, and how the preparation was as much 'the work'
as teaching people how to use a new digital record system.

**PROVIDENCE HEALTH CARE**

**by Katherine Marlow**

Providence Health Care is a non-profit healthcare organisation in
Vancouver, British Columbia committed to compassion, social justice,
excellent care and innovation. Founded by Catholic nuns from Montreal
whose calling was to help the marginalised and poor, the organisation
has a Board of Directors and Society who oversee the strategic plan,
making sure it follows Catholic principles. People don't have to be
Catholic to work here; the work is not about religion, it is about
treating the whole person with compassion. Our focus is on patients,
residents and their families in our hospitals and long-term care homes.
That care and focus spills over to our employees. One pillar of the new
strategic plans launched in April 2019, known as "Inspiring people and
teams", focuses on wrapping our arms around our people.

The organisation has 6,000 employees and 1,000 physicians, the latter
being business owners rather than employees. There are two hospitals,
including a large provincial community teaching hospital, and six
long-term care residences for elderly residents with 24-hour care needs
for dementia and complex health issues. There are also several
specialist sites supporting a variety of medical needs, including
addiction and mental health. In addition, we are a centre of excellence
globally for AIDS and HIV.

In 2018, my team engaged with 4,000 people over six weeks during the
development of a new strategic plan. There were clear themes of what we
do and who we are, surfacing an extremely strong culture of being proud
of who they work with. People said it feels like family and showed they
are committed to doing the right thing. People come to work with
marginalised and vulnerable patients with a real 'can do' attitude. If
someone is overwhelmed, their colleagues help. They talked about being
proud to work here as it is different than other hospitals in Vancouver.
Turnover is fairly low; the issue we have is employee attraction and
burnout because there are not enough people in healthcare. Also, as a
teaching and academic hospital we have lots of Residents and Student
Nurses, so we need to capture their needs in our strategy too. We are a
large research organisation tied to universities for onsite research. It
is key for us to be involved in all these areas of delivering services,
doing the research, and academic teaching too, building strategy needs
to serve all our working imperatives.

Within the province, there was a push to electronic record keeping. In
June 2018, we learnt that our organisation would be the next health
organisation to move to []{#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml_page_43 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 43" role="doc-pagebreak"}digital records. At that point
in time, we started to put change management together. We went out to
the whole organisation and conducted a stakeholder assessment. We went
out to all the different units during the day, at night and on weekends
and talked to people. We wanted to capture how they were feeling about
the change, and wanted to get a sense of their awareness and readiness
for change. We also wanted to see who the early adopters were and who
would champion the work, so we would know who could be part of the
change network. It took a couple of months to get all the data in and
theme it. We created reports for each of our programmes, e.g. mental
health, surgery, medicine, etc. We took those reports and went back out
to each area to validate and consult with department heads: here is the
information your people told us, these are the risks, this is who is
interested in supporting the change. This helped us figure out where we
were as an organisation. The conversion to electronic records had been
going on for approximately six years across the province, so there was
disbelief it would actually happen.

By late 2018, we had a People Readiness Plan (aka a change management
plan) for what things would look like leading up to, during, and post
go-live in November 2019. As a change team, we planned how we would
gather and disseminate data, support a change network, build resiliency,
reduce resistance, and consult with others. We had to align our strategy
and planning with those external to our organisation. We worked with the
provincial Clinical Systems Transformation (CST) team as well as other
health organisations.

There were 629 people on the provincial CST team, seconded from all the
different health authorities to work on the move to digital records. We
had internal staff doing project management and local Clinical
Informatics Specialists who knew the tech and work flows inside out to
ensure successful implementation. There were about 100 specialists
around the Greater Vancouver area, and at Providence there were around
20 of them. We needed to ensure that the specialists understood basic
change management. It is here the learning starts to bring the strategy
to life. We trained the specialists in change and what the frameworks
were. We spent a fair bit of the day coaching them through challenging
conversations, so when they got pushback about the switch to digital
records they had the skills to manage in different situations. That was
very effective work, and we are still getting very good feedback about
it.

In order to implement the roll out, we identified all the speciality
units and departments and assigned a lead change agent (a SUD) for each
area. We had 150 of those leads who were advocates for the change. My
team, known as CST Coaches, attached ourselves to those leads. I had 10
SUDs I supported personally, so if any lead was having a challenge in
their area they'd call me. My role was to make sure they had what they
needed on the floor to support people through the change, which is in
line with our mission to treat people with compassion. Change is
difficult for some people; we recognised that and wanted to make it
easy.

[]{#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml_page_44 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 44"
role="doc-pagebreak"}We had dysfunction in some of our teams around the
change. My team facilitated team activities such as setting simple
rules, having challenging conversations, considering what change looks
like, and how the change will be different for each person on the team.
The intent was to make sure that that when stress was high and tech
change was happening they would still be able to function well as a
team.

Every week there were six SUDs meetings which one or two people from my
team attended. The meetings were intended to check in and let the SUDS
know what their departments needed to do next in relation to the roll
out. During the meetings, we facilitated a variety of change activities
which were customised to what was happening at a point in time. These
included mindfulness activities, short talks on resilience, etc. The
intent was to provide support for those who would be supporting others.
We also gathered data at these meetings by asking questions like 'How
confident are you about...?', 'How ready do you feel about...?', 'How is
your team feeling about...?', and so on. We encouraged people to place a
tick onto a 1-10 paper scale stuck on the door as they left the meeting.

All the metrics we gathered were shared with our senior leadership team,
and were also shared outside of our organisation. We supported other
health authorities who will be doing this digital transformation after
us. From our perspective, we thought: let's share what we have done,
good, bad or ugly, to save others pain along the way.

We had 50,000 patient records which needed to be manually input into new
software. This was not the easiest of jobs. It was a multiple-part job:
the charts needed to go into a template, a physician approved the
template, and the pharmacy needed to look at it, and admin too. The role
my team played was to help manage the process and timings, and support
the people doing the data input.

We put together a wellness strategy with our occupational health and
safety group to create a wellness plan for when we went live with the
digital records. The wellness strategy was crucial for this operational
strategy to work. For 10 days when we went live, my team delivered food
to approximately 600 people each evening at 10.00 pm. With the help of
about 80 head office staff, we also circulated 'Wellness Carts' which
were full of healthy and not so healthy snacks, four times throughout
each 24 hour period. My delivery time was 3.00 am. The purpose of the
Wellness Cart was to lighten the atmosphere, show gratitude and
appreciation, make people smile, and give my team an opportunity to
check how people were feeling about the change. The difference between
people using the new technology on day one vs. day four was phenomenal.

We really took care of the people side of things and made sure that
people were in a place to launch digital records successfully, while not
burning everybody out while trying to do it.

I'm happy to say that digital records launched successfully at 5.58 am
on November []{#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml_page_45 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 45" role="doc-pagebreak"}16, 2019, two minutes earlier
than planned. What a feeling! Digital records will continue to go-live
in some of our outpatient clinics and the rest of our long-term care
homes in 2020. We are prepared. We have our people's wellbeing at heart.

Our change management work was so well received we have been asked to
use the same approach and methodology for creating a change roadmap and
plan for our new hospital which will replace our aging one in 2026.

We are a very strong team in mission, leadership and organisational
change, who are highly skilled in coaching, change management,
organisational development and leadership development. We also have an
amazing Change Lead, Dr Elisa Chavez, who led our change work with
excellence and confidence. Our mission, which is the culture of how
things are done, enables us to do the work we do. We have the privilege
of living our values of compassion, social justice, innovation and
taking care of each other in all the work we do.

**The Case Study Reflections**

*Having worked for Katherine in the past, I am not surprised when she
told me of this sensitive, holistic, human-centred approach to making
strategy come to life. Having read this case study, take time to
consider how it can relate to your context. Here are my reflections for
your consideration, having thought of your own:*

-   *This was a huge project, which was approached systematically, with
    careful data gathering, stakeholder mapping and engagement. The
    preparation for the learning and change was as important as if not
    more important than, the actual learning and change itself.*

-   *Learning does not happen in splendid isolation. The learning
    element to this case study is contained in one small paragraph about
    training specialists in the software. Yet, this whole story is one
    of preparing people for learning how to use a new system. You cannot
    separate the value of stakeholder engagement, systems understanding,
    change management, wellbeing, and so on. Each element has a role to
    play in successful implementation.*

-   *When learning steps into a wider strategic vision, with
    organisation-wide approaches and a holistic learning vision, it can
    feel outside of an L&D remit -- almost stepping into OD territory.
    However, this case study shows how necessary it is for L&D to have a
    wider view for success. Even if L&D is not responsible for the work,
    knowing about the work is crucial.*

-   *I absolutely love the people-first approach taken here. Knowing
    Katherine Marlow personally, I am not surprised to see it. Living
    true to the values of the organisation and care for the individual
    produces a very personalised approach to learning and change that is
    refreshing.*

</aside>

<figure id="_04_CHAPTER_C02_UFigure_4" class="figure">
<p><span id="04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml_page_46" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 46" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF004.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_04_CHAPTER_C02_UFigure_2_9" class="figure"
aria-describedby="_04_CHAPTER_C02_UFigure_2_9_details">
<p><img src="content/images/M04UF001.png"
alt="The figure shows 4 clusters of factors." /></p>
<details id="_04_CHAPTER_C02_UFigure_2_9_details">
<summary>
Figure details
</summary>
<p>The factors are as follows:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Mindset: macro not micro thinking, clear goals, thinking
strategically, O D mindset, values led</p></li>
<li><p>Skillset: ability to read and digest company strategy and annual
reports, financial understanding, business acumen, systems
thinking</p></li>
<li><p>Toolset: company strategy, mission, vision and values, company
annual reports, O D models, press coverage, trade magazines, metaphors
for learning</p></li>
<li><p>Dataset: financial records, customer N P S data, evidence of
need, L and D goals and records, K P I performance data</p></li>
</ul>
</details>
</figure>

<aside aria-label="Tip (2.5)" class="tip" id="_04_CHAPTER_C02_sec_007" role="complementary">

<figure id="_04_CHAPTER_C02_UFigure_5" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF005.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_04_CHAPTER_C02_UTable_2_1" class="table">
<p><a href="#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml__04_CHAPTER_C02_sec_008">Skip
table</a></p>
<div class="table" role="table" tabindex="0">
<table class="left">
<thead>
<tr>
<th scope="col"><p>Tweet</p></th>
<th scope="col"><p>Tips checklist</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><p>20-Jan-15 Review your learning strategy with modern eyes. Mirror
private life into work life with YouTube &amp; peer network
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Recognisable strategy</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>12-Feb-15 Talk to people outside of your normal frame of
reference to get new ideas. Chat to a totally different sector
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Get outside your bubble</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>16-Apr-15 Ensure a future-proof learning agenda with a proactive
policy which reflects strategy of the whole business
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Proactive policy</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><span id="04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml_page_47" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 47" role="doc-pagebreak"></span>18-May-15 Understanding
shift from transactional to consultative is key to moving L&amp;D on.
Seek peers to share stories #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Transactional to consultative</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>10-Jul-15 Maps help us know where we are going. Do you know where
your L&amp;D map is taking you? Get yourself directions
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Give yourself directions</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>27-Jul-15 Often business is risk averse, which means you need to
prove concepts of L&amp;D evolution to prove lack of risk
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Proof of concept</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>28-Jul-15 To mitigate feelings of risk in social learning, prove
concepts with research, evidence &amp; context via mini-pilots
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Contextual evidence</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>29-Jul-15 Mini-pilots for proof of concept could be new induction
programme, team meet sharing post-course, Enterprise Social Networks
trial #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Value pilots</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>31-Jul-15 Having gained contextual evidence via pilots use wider
research to back up your business case to evolve L&amp;D
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Wider evidence</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>06-Aug-15 When building a business case ensure those reading it
can recognise their org in the modern learning vision
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Build a business case</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>26-Oct-15 Making a cultural shift to learning as everyday takes
time. Plan your strategy to include addressing mindset
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Learner’s mindset strategy</strong></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
</figure>

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (2.6)" class="box" id="_04_CHAPTER_C02_sec_008" role="complementary">

<figure id="_04_CHAPTER_C02_UFigure_6" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF006.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Do you understand your organisation's strategy? Ask for
    clarification if not.

-   Does your learning strategy stem from the organisational goals? Or
    elsewhere?

-   []{#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml_page_48 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 48"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}Where is L&D in the business' achievements?
    Align the two strategies for success.

-   Would learners clearly know why any L&D offer benefits them and
    their business?

-   L&D should never operate in isolation. Who are your allies?

-   Do you think micro when you should be thinking macro?

-   Where can you get inspiration outside of your field which can help
    you reflect on ways to do things differently?

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (2.7)" class="box" id="_04_CHAPTER_C02_sec_009" role="complementary">

<figure id="_04_CHAPTER_C02_UFigure_7" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF007.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Take a step back out of the L&D space.

-   Do the hard graft in the wider organisation.

-   Talk to all people around your business.

-   Take an evidence-based approach.

-   Start doing detective work.

-   Understand your business.

-   Be aligned to your company strategy.

-   Understand the strategic intent.

-   Avoid being a solutioneer.

-   Be a critical friend instead.

-   Maintain a strategic focus.

-   Talk the language of your business.

-   Engage in macro thinking.

-   Take a holistic approach to success.

-   Be aware of organisational history, space junk and forces on the
    strings.

</aside>

::: {#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml__04_CHAPTER_C02_sec_010 .section .references .bibliography aria-label="THE LIBRARY LIST (2.8)" role="doc-bibliography"}
<figure id="_04_CHAPTER_C02_UFigure_2_8" class="figure">
<p><span id="04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml_page_49" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 49" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF008.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Arets, J, Jennings, C, and Heijnen, V (2015) *70:20:10 Towards 100%
    Performance*, Sulter Media, Maastricht

-   Buchanan, L (2013) Welcome to the Church of Fail,
    [[inc.com]{.url-hyperlink}](https://inc.com) \[online\]
    [[www.inc.com/magazine/201311/leigh-buchanan/nixonmcinnes-innovation-by-celebrating-mistakes.html]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.inc.com/magazine/201311/leigh-buchanan/nixonmcinnes-innovation-by-celebrating-mistakes.html)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/BB4R-74AK]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/BB4R-74AK)).

-   CIPD (2020) Learning & Skills at Work, *CIPD* \[online\]
    [[www.cipd.co.uk/knowledge/strategy/development/learning-skills-work]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.cipd.co.uk/knowledge/strategy/development/learning-skills-work)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/FBS8-Q7AJ]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/FBS8-Q7AJ))

-   CIPD (2019) Professionalising Learning and Development, *CIPD*
    \[online\].
    [[www.cipd.co.uk/knowledge/strategy/development/professionalising-learning-development-function]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.cipd.co.uk/knowledge/strategy/development/professionalising-learning-development-function)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/9DVJ-JRNR]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/9DVJ-JRNR))

-   Gurney, A (2020) Girlguiding 2020+ Strategy, *Girlguiding*
    \[online\]
    [[www.girlguiding.org.uk/making-guiding-happen/how-were-being-our-best/updates-for-our-members/strategy-2020/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.girlguiding.org.uk/making-guiding-happen/how-were-being-our-best/updates-for-our-members/strategy-2020/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/KC22-RX2X]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/KC22-RX2X))

-   Hayden, D (2019) Data, thinking, more data, more thinking, big data,
    big thinking\..., *talentdelivers* \[online\]
    [[www.talentdelivers.wordpress.com/2019/11/01/data-thinking-more-data-more-thinking-big-data-big-thinking/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.talentdelivers.wordpress.com/2019/11/01/data-thinking-more-data-more-thinking-big-data-big-thinking/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/B9VW-KUVS]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/B9VW-KUVS))
:::

::: {#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml__04_CHAPTER_C02_sec_011 .section .endnotes aria-labelledby="_04_CHAPTER_C02_h1_011"}
# Notes {#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml__04_CHAPTER_C02_h1_011 .title}

[1](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml__04_CHAPTER_C02_Endnote_2_1_reference) CIPD's
2019 report is available to download alongside an infographic of the
same,
[[www.cipd.co.uk/knowledge/strategy/development/professionalising-learning-development-function]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.cipd.co.uk/knowledge/strategy/development/professionalising-learning-development-function)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/9DVJ-JRNR]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/9DVJ-JRNR))

[2](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml__04_CHAPTER_C02_Endnote_2_2_reference)
Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortisation
:::

[]{#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

<div>

[]{#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml_page_50 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 50"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[[03]{.ordinal
.ordinal}](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_05_CHAPTER_C03_sec_001)

# [Stakeholder Engagement](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_05_CHAPTER_C03_sec_001) {#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml__05_CHAPTER_C03_h1_001 .title}

How to create better impact in learning by building great relationships

</div>

<figure id="_05_CHAPTER_C03_UFigure_3_1" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF001.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

Alison Jones, author, publisher and head judge of the Business Book
Awards, once said to me that if you can't describe your book in two
sentences, you're in trouble. In the context of our conversation, I took
that to mean a succinct and relevant two sentences. I believe the same
can be said of a learning programme, particularly when you're trying to
engage with your stakeholders. You have to be able to explain clearly
and concisely what your learning programmes offer and why people should
be interested in them. Can you describe your learning offer in two
sentences? Does it do what it says on the tin? Do people in your
organisation know the value of L&D? If the answer is no to any of these
questions, then this chapter is for you!

Stakeholder engagement is central to the success of learning and
development. You need your stakeholders on board with you all the way.
You are not operating in isolation and it's important to realise that
you never have sole responsibility for learning and development, even if
you are the only L&D practitioner in your organisation. Every individual
employee, every individual line manager and every individual department
is responsible for people development, both in terms of developing
themselves and developing those who work for them. I always think of the
line 'No man is an island' from Nick Hornby's film *About a Boy* (a
quote from John Donne). It is all about the importance of community,
with a central message that we thrive []{#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml_page_51
.pagebreak aria-label="Page 51" role="doc-pagebreak"}when we act as part
of a community, but we do badly when we act in isolation. I genuinely
believe this to be true, in business and in life. Human beings are
social creatures and we need to feel connected. At CIPD, I always talk
about #OneTeam, whether to cross-departmental internal colleagues, or
external associates, subject experts, students, delegates, members, or
branches. Everyone is necessary for success.

As an L&D professional, you are a central part of your organisation's
community and you really need to work well with your stakeholders to
make sure that, as a community, everyone gets the best out of learning
and development. It has to be a community effort. Even with a drive
towards self-directed learning in an organisation, learning activity
might largely come from L&D, but it is fulfilled by individuals who are
part of an organisation. This means that learning is only as good as
those who are fully engaged with it. And for them to be properly
engaged, people need to understand the value of learning, why they are
doing it, and what it brings to them and the business. You need to
demonstrate all of this to them and you need to be able to encapsulate
it all in about two sentences. It is the L&D elevator pitch; do you know
what you stand for in L&D?

In doing so, you need to be acting not in the interests of L&D, but in
the interests of the organisation. The learning doesn't need to be
whizzy, it doesn't need to use the latest tech, and it doesn't need to
have all the bells and whistles -- it just needs to be addressing a
learning need of your organisational colleagues. What is the problem
that you are trying to solve in conjunction with the business? Always
keep your focus on the business problem, not on the latest L&D fad or
shiny learning platform. They may not be right in your context. We
talked about this a little in [Chapter 2](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml), and I
will keep talking about it because it is so unbelievably important to
focus on solving business problems, not perceived learning problems. L&D
has no purpose in solving problems alone; 'no man is an island',
remember. You are part of a community, solving business challenges
together.

You have to work with your stakeholders at all levels, from a basic
'Please let me go on a learning programme' right up to 'How are you
going to land this learning in your organisation?' It is easy for L&D to
think it is responsible for all of this. It is not. L&D can advise, can
support, can cajole, can encourage, but people have to be on board and
involved for learning to happen. That is why stakeholder engagement is
so critically important. As they say, you can lead a horse to water, but
you cannot make it drink.

The question you have to ask yourself is: 'Who are the stakeholders?' Is
it the people doing the learning? Line managers? Senior leadership team?
[]{#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml_page_52 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 52"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Shareholders? Hopefully, you already know the
answer to that question given what we have already talked about in this
book: the answer is, of course, everyone connected to your organisation.
It can even include external groups, such as customers and business
partners. The message here is that you need to think very deeply and
broadly about your stakeholder groupings.

Unfortunately, people can often have a very narrow view of their
stakeholders. They tend to think of stakeholders in terms of senior
teams and shareholders, or simply those people listed in their job
descriptions or remit. Look more deeply than that. In particular, look
for the influencers in the organisation -- the people who are connected
to others and to the organisation's mission. It is those influencers,
those connected people, who ultimately drive, influence, grow, or change
the organisational culture. You need to be tapped into those connections
because they are the ones who can help the learning journey to happen.

<figure id="_05_CHAPTER_C03_UFigure_3_2" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF002.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

[Stakeholder
engagement](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_05_CHAPTER_C03_h3_001)

The first thing you have to do is work out who your stakeholders are.
You need to compile a 'Who's Who?' list of people in your organisation.
Who are the movers and shakers? Who are the people that everyone else
gravitates towards and around? Who are the connectors? Who are the
influencers? Who are the detractors? I'm not talking about cut and
pasting the names of everyone in the senior leadership team into a
document and thinking that's your 'Who's Who' list. It is easy to assume
the top managers are the movers and shakers and the rainmakers, just
because they are at the top of the hierarchical tree. It could well be
that your list is populated by those people at the top, but it might not
be. It could even be that none of them make it onto to the list, though
that would be a pretty damning indictment of your top team if that were
the case. Chances are your list will include a broad and diverse spread
of people and you may be surprised by who you come up with when you do
your stakeholder mapping. It could actually be (in fact, is very likely
to be) that it's the people who are in the informal influence
[]{#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml_page_53 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 53"
role="doc-pagebreak"}spaces who really stand out. They could be the
people you really need to speak to to get an understanding of learning
gaps, the perceptions, respect and appreciation of L&D within the
organisation, and to help understand just how to best land your next
learning initiative.

Your stakeholders are the people who hold the key to your work, the
people who do the work, and the people who enable the work to happen.
These are the real people that you need to know about and get in touch
with. So, it could be Annette from Accounts, because if she doesn't pay
the invoices, then the work doesn't get done. Or it could be Rashmi from
Reception, who knows absolutely everybody. Or Samantha from Sales, who
needs help closing some deals. These key people can often identify where
hot situations are because they are connected and have their ears to the
ground. They can help you identify where the real learning needs to
happen.

One of the reasons why it's so important to create your 'Who's Who' list
is because your influencers can so easily be detractors. As influencers,
they can influence others in a positive way but also in a negative way,
and you really want them to be influencing in a positive way. You want
them to be advocates of your learning solutions, not detractors. You
want them on your side. You want Samantha to be shouting 'I struggled
with sales, but L&D really helped me'.

How we get these people on side is simple. Talk to them. Meet them. Call
them. Build relationships with them.

[The strategic
latte](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_05_CHAPTER_C03_h3_002)

Ian Pettigrew, who runs Kingfisher Coaching, talked to me about having
strategic lattes with people, and in his words described the concept as
'a purposeful positive time together for mutually selfish benefit'. Ian
has been having strategic lattes for almost 20 years, initially starting
because he didn't feel he was getting to pause and reflect in a busy
week. The premise is really simple; it is a brew with a purpose. A
purpose of pausing, reflecting, and talking openly. An opportunity to
answer the question 'How are you today?' with a fuller answer than
'Fine, thank you. How are you?' Ian's experience is that these
conversations have been hugely beneficial on several levels. Talking
openly about how we're feeling is beneficial for our resilience and our
mental health. The conversations also provide encouragement to pause and
reflect. And there was an unexpected by-product of forming solid,
trusted relationships.

[]{#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml_page_54 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 54"
role="doc-pagebreak"}The essence of the strategic latte is to have a
conversation without an agenda or purpose. It is important to be clear
that this is not coaching. This is a conversation with an interesting
person for the mutual benefit of both sides. It is a chance to have a
deeper, focused conversation with the by-product of building stronger
relationships and networks. It is a relationship conversation, not a
stakeholder conversation. A strategic latte isn't something to be
trotted out once, and you are done. A relationship does not happen
instantly. In summary, it is an opportunity to talk at a higher level in
a deeper way.

That framing of a conversation may be at odds with your position or
context within a company. Can you suggest having a coffee with the
people you want to talk to in your organisation? I hope the answer is
yes, but the reality could be different. You may wish, at first, to have
strategic lattes with your personal learning network rather than your
work colleagues to see and feel the benefits. The opportunity for mutual
inspiration and positive talking out loud about learning may be a great
preparation for raising your confidence to bring the concept into your
workplace.

As with any great idea, there is scope to adopt and adapt; I take the
liberty of considering the adoption of the strategic latte approach as
slightly more focused than originally intended. The concept of a deeper
thinking, higher-level conversation that builds stronger connections can
be applied to more purposeful stakeholder engagement. When you have
deeper insight because you know people well, the work flows more freely
and later conversations become easier.

Whilst there should always be time for a coffee at work, sometimes in
business we need to be discretionary about how and where our time and
talents are shared. You need to consider who you need to speak to to be
successful with your L&D initiatives. This means that the mutually
beneficial conversation may be a little more of a stakeholder
conversation -- less you, more them. This is truly not the essence of
Ian's idea -- he is a much more giving person than I, perhaps. But what
I am suggesting is that, as a part of the natural conversation, you ask
directed discovery questions. Not in a pushy or intimidating way, but
with a kind purpose, and certainly not pushing a learning agenda, but
rather really focusing on the problems that your fellow coffee drinker
has.

With this more direct approach, you can see where L&D can support
colleagues' work. What are their issues? Is there something that they
would like to be better at in their work? If there is, what would better
look like? Consider how to help them to reach that vision. Asking good
questions []{#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml_page_55 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 55" role="doc-pagebreak"}and listening intently is
massively important -- not quite the mutually selfish intent, nor the
genuine interest in each other of the strategic latte, but a
conversation from a kind place to see where you can help people. And if
that conversation builds a better relationship, next time, a real
strategic latte conversation could follow.

[Stakeholder
mapping](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_05_CHAPTER_C03_h3_003)

But how do we really know who to speak to? Who is on our strategic latte
list? Johnson, Scholes and Whittington (2005) have long talked about
stakeholder mapping, taking into account who has high power to influence
and who has high levels of interest. Represented as a four-box grid, it
helps focus on people to speak to. As a model, it is workable and offers
useful possibilities for a first-time stakeholder engager. Johnson,
Scholes and Whittington talk about levels of engagement in
relationships; after all, there is limited time in a working day. We can
build up a map of who the key players are -- who we need to keep
satisfied, and who we need to keep informed -- and there are those with
whom we need to put in minimal effort. For me, this is where the model
can fall apart. Those 'minimal effort' stakeholders are often on the
receiving end of our learning offer, put there by those with more power
and influence. A room, virtual or real, full of such learners will
always work harder and get more from learning if they have a
relationship with L&D in the first place. People are more engaged in
learning if they have been consulted and have co-created
it[]{#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml__05_CHAPTER_C03_Endnote_3_1_reference
.anchor}^[1](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml__05_CHAPTER_C03_Endnote_3_1)^.

Other models are more product or customer-focused, mapping the important
people against a product development, for example. These models, such as
Customer Experience, Service Design, or Design Thinking, tend to focus
on user personas. Their thinking is very useful for the design of
learning, but personally I don't find them overly useful for
understanding internal stakeholders or planning L&D goals and strategy.

Overall, I don't believe there is one model to follow for you to get to
know the people in your organisation. I honestly prefer Ian's strategic
latte, which suggests that actually anyone can be valuable to have a
conversation with. Start somewhere and let your questions take you where
you need to go. The scientifically minded amongst you may throw your
hands up in horror at this lack of structure. Feel free to ask the same
few questions to a variety of people in that case. Personally, I believe
to really know your business you start with strategy, then move to
people, who will naturally lead you to more people.

[]{#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml_page_56 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 56"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[Building
relationships](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_05_CHAPTER_C03_h3_004)

Having established your 'Who's Who, and knowing who you want to speak
to, you need to set the ball rolling by building relationships with
those people. You might have identified that the real influencers are
people in less prominent roles, but that doesn't mean you ignore your
formal stakeholders. You still need to build strong relationships with
formal stakeholders, even if they have less influence than they think or
would like. Most of us work in hierarchical organisations, and those
hierarchies need to be respected.

This is where I'd like to talk about daisies. Some people in
organisations are like daisies: they are at the centre of an otherwise
disconnected team. The team all roots through the middle section, like a
daisy, through that anchor point. Potentially, that central anchor is
the only stakeholder in that department, making it a weak department.
Don't be fooled by a daisy
constellation.[]{#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml__05_CHAPTER_C03_Endnote_3_2_reference
.anchor}^[2](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml__05_CHAPTER_C03_Endnote_3_2)^ It may
look like a pretty flower; however, with everything rooting through one
person, with those around it not being connected to each other, or even
having a voice, it really isn't pretty at all for strong relationships,
successful work, or shared learning.

<figure id="_05_CHAP_3_UFigure_3_1" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M05UF001.png"
alt="The figure shows a large central circle with 8 smaller circles arranged on spokes around the center." /></p>
</figure>

A department that is strong, effective, learning from each other, and
generally functioning well actually looks more like a spider's web. It's
a mix of people who are interconnected and interdependent, with lots of
crossover points (with themselves and with other departments) and lots
of formal and informal relationships. Think about how strong spiders'
webs are, yet how light those connections might be.

<figure id="_05_CHAP_3_UFigure_3_2" class="figure">
<p><span id="05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml_page_57" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 57" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M05UF002.png"
alt="The figure shows a network of circles." /></p>
<details id="_05_CHAPTER_C03_UFigure_3_2_details">
<summary>
Figure details
</summary>
<p>The factors are as follows:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Mindset: macro not micro thinking, clear goals, thinking
strategically, O D mindset, values led</p></li>
<li><p>Skillset: ability to read and digest company strategy and annual
reports, financial understanding, business acumen, systems
thinking</p></li>
<li><p>Toolset: company strategy, mission, vision and values, company
annual reports, O D models, press coverage, trade magazines, metaphors
for learning</p></li>
<li><p>Dataset: financial records, customer N P S data, evidence of
need, L and D goals and records, K P I performance data</p></li>
</ul>
</details>
</figure>

The tops of hierarchies and the centre of daisy constellations aren't
necessarily where you will find your relevant stakeholders. You do need
to know who these people are and have relationships with them because
otherwise they might be your detractors or can be blockers to learning
and development. They can actively, or unwittingly, sabotage L&D
activities if they are not on board. However, as discussed, they are not
always the positive influencers, as much as they think they are.

You need to speak to your detractors, blockers, and negative influencers
just the same as you do to your advocates and your influencers. You need
to consider turning everyone into advocates; to be talking to everyone
about your interventions, engaging them with what needs to happen and
why.

Essentially, you need to be speaking up, down, and all around your
organisation. You need to build relationships with everyone. You need to
focus your energies in different ways for different influencers,
especially those who can help you gain further engagement. What do they
do? What []{#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml_page_58 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 58" role="doc-pagebreak"}are they like? How do they
engage? How do they like to be engaged? When are their busy periods?
What does their annual year of work look like? Where are the gaps in
their annual calendar? You need to know a lot of detail about these
people in order to get learning and development to run smoothly in your
organisation.

[Difficult developmental
conversations](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_05_CHAPTER_C03_h3_005)

As mentioned, strategic lattes are for detractors, blockers, and lone
daisy managers too. Don't let them slip through the net. Facing up to
difficult conversations is a really important part of stakeholder
engagement. Otherwise, such people could be very vocal opponents of what
you need to achieve. How do you approach those difficult conversations?
How do you overcome entrenched views and positions? How do you speak to
them in a way that is fruitful and purposeful and will get them on side?
Will they even talk to you? Your detractors could be detractors because
they have a low opinion of learning and development. Why should they
care about what you want to say? About the importance of people
development?

That's when it's time to go back to [Chapter 2](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml)
on understanding strategy. You are having a business conversation with
business people. You are not having a learning conversation. If someone
doesn't care about learning and development, then, quite possibly the
worst thing you can say is "What learning do you need for your team?' It
is far better to ask questions such as: 'What keeps you awake at night?
What is the thing that worries you the most? If you could paint a
picture of your ideal department, what would it look like? How would
people behave differently? What might that look like?' In having this
type of conversation, you are simply asking your detractor to paint the
future as they would like to see it, which helps them to describe an
ideal move from one situation to another place.

Holding such open conversations on their terms highlights the gaps, and
herein lies your opportunity. It is by identifying this future view that
we can see the gap for L&D to support. At this point, replay the future
view for them to hear; describe how L&D can engage to help with their
people development. You will need to judge for yourself in the course of
the conversation how much solutioneering you jump into. It may be best
to just listen in the first conversation, then have a second
conversation with the benefit of some distance and reflection where you
can remind the detractor of their problem and share your solution to
resolve it. Often the act of listening is all a detractor wants (hence
the first conversation). Then, the feeling of being
[]{#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml_page_59 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 59"
role="doc-pagebreak"}heard makes the solution much more palatable,
particularly if that solution is well considered, evidence-based, and
thought through (offered in the second conversation). As I've mentioned
throughout, linking L&D to business needs is a powerful motivation for
people to get engaged.

Once you have engaged your detractors, it becomes easier for your
message -- and therefore your learning offer -- to have impact. It also
becomes easier to prove your value as a learning and development
professional, because by engaging with a problem and then solving it,
you are demonstrating value in a tangible, accessible way. In going
through this process and building up trusted relationships, you end up
with trusted partner status. This will pave the way for future successes
because that status enables you to go on to produce yet more successful
projects. The initial relationship is like a springboard.

Let's look at another illustration. You are a facilitator and have a
detractor in your cohort. This individual is only there because their
line manager said they needed to be there to fulfil annual learning
hours compliance (which is a whole other story, but not for now!). This
detractor has been in the business for 30 years and believes they know
everything there is to know about their job. What can you possibly teach
them that they don't already know? More than that, they know it better
than you because they've been doing it for so long. I am sure many
face-to-face practitioners know exactly how to deal with this kind of
situation: you need to use your experience to shift that less than
enthusiastic learner and bring them over to engaging in building their
skillset, because there are always things to learn. I am convinced there
is always something someone can learn. I always assume good intent in
people and am willing to help. A lot of that is about their mindset and
willingness to do so. There are many ways to encourage that in the room
-- flatter their ego, make them look good in front of their colleagues,
invite them to lead some of the learning.

It is important to address the real reasons for the resistant
stakeholder not wanting to be there. I believe it is better to approach
the issue before the learning takes place. Treat them as a trusted
expert and get them on side. If that person has been in the company for
so long you really should have had them on your strategic latte list
already. Their participation in the session could be as a subject matter
expert, not a grumpy learner, and you should have already spoken to them
about that, following which you have a brilliant opportunity to show the
value of learning and development and to create a new advocate. Rather
than telling them that actually you know best (as you probably don't),
you can tap into their knowledge as a teacher, but
[]{#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml_page_60 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 60"
role="doc-pagebreak"}also challenge their role as a learner. Ask them
what the most pressing issue is, and support them in solving those
problems during the session. With crowdsourced solutions that focus on
their work and personal learning to help them achieve personal aims, you
can create a confident advocate. Your goals and metrics are theirs too
-- their work is your work -- because without all the people, the
advocates and the detractors, you have no work.

It is also worth remembering this: converts often make the best
advocates because their learning journey has been significant. As well
as the actual learning, they have undergone a shift in attitude and
mindset towards learning, which can be a very powerful experience. In
doing this, you have given learning and development a significant uplift
in your organisation (and in general) and you are encouraging learning
and development as the norm.

[Cake theory](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_05_CHAPTER_C03_h3_006)

I'll give you a quick example of a situation I was in when a detractor
was converted into a positive influencer. I once implemented a digital
learning platform into a global organisation and I quickly noticed from
the statistics and reports that one particular country office hadn't
engaged at all -- there were zero log-ins from that office. I noted it,
but decided not to investigate -- there are only so many working hours
in the day and the rest of the organisation was engaged, so I parked it
for when I had more time. With stakeholders, it is important to pick
your battles.

Before finding the time to have that particular battle, I actually
received a phone call from the country MD. He was ringing to apologise.
He said he had told all of his staff that he did not want to see them on
a video-based learning platform because there was no way they were going
to be watching TV at work. Then he had to log in and engage with the
platform not for the first time when we used it exclusively to upload
information about the annual conference. This made him realise what it
was all about and the benefits of a point-of-need learning tool in an
accessible format, which prompted his call to me to apologise. He said
he hadn't understood that the platform enabled peer-to-peer learning and
engagement, or that it was user friendly and a fast point-of-need
reference to enable 'the work' to continue in a much less time invasive
learning method than a day out of the office on a face-to-face
programme. Now that he understood the purpose of the learning platform,
he promised me that everyone in that country office would access it by
the end of the week. He kept true to his word; they even became some of
the platform's biggest advocates.

[]{#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml_page_61 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 61"
role="doc-pagebreak"}I call this kind of conversion 'cake theory'. If
you make good cake, people will want a slice. You know how it goes when
a colleague brings a cake into the office, say for someone's birthday,
and suddenly lots of people seem to appear that you haven't seen for a
while. All of a sudden, Irène from Payroll, who normally nobody ever
sees, is at your desk asking for a slice. Or Juan-Henrique from the
senior management office turns up saying: 'I heard there was cake...'

The message here is, if you make better learning cake, people will come.
They will want a slice of the action, they will see the relevance
because it relates to their issues. These people instantly become your
advocates. As L&D professionals, we have to continually strive to make
better cake. L&D needs to be irresistible to stakeholders. Creating
solutions to solve stakeholders' business challenges is a sure way to
build cake advocacy.

[The impact of stakeholder
engagement](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_05_CHAPTER_C03_h3_007)

The impact of learning projects stems from that initial relationship we
have with the stakeholders involved. Do they trust us? Do they value us?
Do they understand how we are trying to help them, and why? Once all of
that is in place, you can have really good consultative L&D
conversations. In addition, make a clear line of sight of the
measurements that you need in order to evaluate the success of any
project. There will be more on consultative L&D and measurement in later
chapters.

There are many books and models available that will tell you that you
have to be consultative, although not many in relation to L&D. It's also
key to have clarity, as I hope I have demonstrated to you here. You have
to have a very clear, purposeful picture of how, why and what you are
trying to build in L&D alongside stakeholders. In order to have impact
with them, you have to be crystal clear on what it is that they want to
achieve, which, of course, comes from your strategic understanding, as
discussed in [Chapter 2](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml), and how you are going
to build your L&D offer for them, which comes from stakeholder
engagement conversations.

<aside aria-label="EXAMPLE (3.1)" class="example" epub:type="practice" id="_05_CHAPTER_C03_sec_002" role="complementary">

EXAMPLE

There is another example that I would like to share with you here,
involving me and a CEO who wanted to be an influencer in his
organisation. He was present in the organisation, but he didn't walk the
floor; people didn't really []{#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml_page_62 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 62" role="doc-pagebreak"}know him, he didn't have
influencer status. To many employees, he was purely part of the
hierarchy. My remit as L&D lead was to deliver a leadership development
programme for the senior team and, by default, as part of that team,
him. We started with his confidence to share his vision. Despite being
largely unknown, he was a good leader, so he needed to be front and
centre in the programme. We had to change his status and turn him into
an influencer so that his vision would be engaged with by the leaders on
the programme and cascaded to other employees. I recorded videos with
him to share his vision on the learning platform. Whilst this provided
learning largely for him, I made sure the videos always had a very clear
purpose for his audience too. He wanted to sit there and do a kind of
'read the news' type thing. Out of respect, I always let him do that.
However, afterwards I kept him chatting with the camera rolling. He was
more relaxed and it was these more casual interviews that made it out
onto the platform. The CEO realised these recordings were gaining him
influence -- people were talking to him about the messages, the videos
were getting likes and shares.

My role was to find a means for the CEO to demonstrate a positive impact
that would build his influence, thus fulfilling my role of developing
him whilst also gaining content for the leadership programme. Along the
way, he would learn how to increase this impact and influence further,
how to relax in front of the camera, and how to engage with his staff.
My role may not have been highly technical, but I approached it with
kindness and humility. I didn't want to see him fail or fall. My part
was just one piece of a larger puzzle, getting what the CEO had in his
head out there to his senior team and on to others. My role in learning
was clear, and his role as CEO in his own learning context was very
clear too. The vision of the CEO was shared, understood, and acted on by
his senior leadership team.

To achieve this, and to be able to demonstrate success, you have to have
a clear line of measurement. It's about scaffolding relationships --
understanding the problem to be solved, helping to solve it with the
appropriate solutions, and building relationships on from there. You
don't have to be best mates with people. I wasn't best mates with the
CEO, but we knew what we needed from each other.

</aside>

Engagement comes in many forms -- engaging in learning, in sharing, and
in relationships. A foundation of strong, respectful, supportive,
listening connections is the bedrock of a strong, impactful, successful,
aligned L&D department. This is the work, and it starts long before any
learning solutions.

<aside aria-label="CASE-STUDY (3.2)" class="case-study" epub:type="case-study" id="_05_CHAPTER_C03_sec_003" role="complementary">

<figure id="_05_CHAPTER_C03_UFigure_4" class="figure">
<p><span id="05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml_page_63" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 63" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF004.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

This case study is from a manufacturing business. I spoke to a country
MD in 2019 to discuss how she changed the fortunes of the business
through stakeholder engagement at every level. During the conversation,
she told me that fundamentally staff were not interested in learning
they were interested in earning. It was from this position that she had
to motivate a team out of impending disaster.

**GLOBAL MANUFACTURING BUSINESS**

The story starts in October 2014 when Gita became the MD of an
organisation in crisis. The parent company was considering closing the
business down. Morale was at an all-time low, there were trust issues
and, due to the loss of the organisation's biggest customer, a resultant
50 per cent fall in sales. Everyone was under pressure to do their best
work. Staff were ready to take redundancy -- they wanted to leave.

Gita had four weeks to set a budget and decide on a strategy. She knew
she had to share the problem to solve the problem, so she went out on to
the shop floor to talk to people and find out what was going on. She
sought out the influencers. She looked at the organisation chart and
selected 50 of the 270 names listed there and spent 20 minutes with each
of those 50 people individually, hearing what they had to say. She asked
them all five identical questions, and they were free to tell her
anything. She used those answers to build the strategy.

Gita's analysis of those conversations showed her that it was a very
hierarchical organisation with no accountability and lots of reactive
behaviour. There was a strong blame culture, there were too many layers
of management, and nobody asked questions -- they simply followed
process. There were problems with manufacturing, problems with
warehousing, problems with delivery crews. Basically, the arms and legs
of the organisation all moved independently of each other, with
departments not talking, even though they depended on each other.

This gave her the strategy. She decided to create customer centric
groups, to reorganise structurally without departments, to reduce
management hierarchy to empower people, to upskill, and win hearts and
minds to incentivise teams. Because communication had been an issue
(factory staff, who made up 70 per cent of the workforce, didn't have
email access, yet comms went via email, so nobody knew what was going
on), they started having daily team meetings instead. At those meetings,
[]{#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml_page_64 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 64"
role="doc-pagebreak"}managers met with their teams (and this was
enshrined as a KPI) to create a culture shift around comms on the big
topics and issues. The new philosophy was 'no ridicule, no blame' and to
give everyone a chance. KPIs were refocused to ensure a definition of
where problems came from so that they could be addressed in advance.

Of course, there were sceptics among the staff about the changes, so she
bought in external mentors to guide the managers. It also meant that as
the MD she wasn't the only voice advocating for effective change. The
attitude became one of 'blinkers off', so everything became possible.
They took an evidence-based approach, which made continuous improvement
possible. They had a motto (adopted from W. Edwards Deming): 'In God we
trust, everyone else has to bring data.'

People realised there was hidden expertise in the organisation. A
programme sharing the tools and techniques of Six Sigma process
improvement was established and it was discovered there was a Six Sigma
black belt continual improvement manager in the team. Nobody had known
that. It took collaboration with external people and a refocusing on the
skills of existing staff to find out what was possible.

What happened next? After all that stakeholder groundwork, people
practices increased and learning programmes were started, as the teams
were more receptive to that investment. The company then invested in
people, apprentices, and Institute of Leadership & Management
certifications. People felt valued. They spread Six Sigma throughout the
organisation to improve quality and train everyone to have the same
voice. It enabled truth telling, honesty, shared problem solving, and
invited everyone to go on the journey. The investment in people was felt
throughout, lifting teams up, giving them a common language, and engaged
them in learning. There was reward, praise and constructive criticism,
rather than fear. And with leaders of the organisation sharing the
story, all line managers took learning responsibilities seriously.

All of this revitalised the company, enabled it to turn its fortunes
around, and closure was averted.

**The Case Study Reflections**

*This case study clearly demonstrates the value of listening to all
levels of an organisation. Sometimes, all stakeholders actually need is
to be listened to. Take time to consider how the case study can relate
to your context. Here are my reflections for your consideration, having
thought of your own.*

-   *I was struck by how few people the MD needed to speak to to get a
    good measure of the business -- just 18.5 per cent of staff. At 20
    minutes each, it was a significant time investment, but it paid
    dividends to invest in that time.*

-   *I was amazed to hear about the unearthing of a Six Sigma black belt
    among the staff that nobody knew about. It is amazing that people
    with talent can be right under your nose, but nobody spoke to them.*

-   []{#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml_page_65 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 65"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}*The value of a data-led approach with evidence
    made it easier to see the solutions and supported what should stop
    and what should start.*

-   *The value of being approachable: the MD reached out and everyone
    made time for her. Make time for people and listen well.*

-   *Having listened well, she identified process and learning as the
    solutions for the issues. The MD in question is not an L&D
    professional; however, by taking the approach discussed in this
    chapter, she has shown that stakeholder engagement works. The
    solution to every problem is not always L&D. However, we are
    reminded that only by having good discussions can we know that. How
    many times is learning thrown at an organisational issue when the
    groundwork isn't done, or the groundwork shows the organisation is
    not ready? Imagine if she had thrown around quick fix L&D solutions
    when she first arrived. Disaster!*

-   *The impact of positive language on a demoralised team through truth
    telling, sharing problems, and stopping blame is hugely useful to
    consider in stakeholder conversations. Blame in business is a
    disease which needs cutting out.*

-   *Investing in people made them feel valued. L&D became the glue that
    held people together; they were learning as they were solving their
    business challenges. Having come from silos, the humanity and trust
    in people to do the job together in this case is an inspiration.*

</aside>

<figure id="_05_CHAPTER_C03_UFigure_3_4" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF004.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_05_CHAPTER_C03_UFigure_3_9" class="figure"
aria-describedby="_05_CHAPTER_C03_UFigure_3_9_details">
<p><img src="content/images/M05UF003.png"
alt="The figure shows 4 clusters of factors." /></p>
<details id="_05_CHAPTER_C03_UFigure_3_9_details">
<summary>
Figure details
</summary>
<p>The factors are as follows:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Mindset: open to listening, not talking, resistant to
solutioneering, not judging, open to everyone, attentive</p></li>
<li><p>Skillset: listening, observation, planning, enhanced stakeholder
mapping, supporting workplace performance, ability to create space for
conversations</p></li>
<li><p>Toolset: principles around speaking up, understanding people and
network constellations, business psychology, internal newsletter,
intranet, enterprise social network</p></li>
<li><p>Dataset: organization charts, networks, known influencers, known
detractors, identified loud and quiet voices, outputs from sitting in
departments and going back to the floor</p></li>
</ul>
</details>
</figure>

<aside aria-label="Tip (3.3)" class="tip" id="_05_CHAPTER_C03_sec_005" role="complementary">

<figure id="_05_CHAPTER_C03_UFigure_3_5" class="figure">
<p><span id="05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml_page_66" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 66" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF005.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_05_CHAPTER_C03_UTable_3_1" class="table">
<p><a href="#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml__05_CHAPTER_C03_sec_006">Skip
table</a></p>
<div class="table" role="table" tabindex="0">
<table class="left">
<thead>
<tr>
<th scope="col"><p>Tweet</p></th>
<th scope="col"><p>Tips checklist</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><p>07-Jan-15 Knowledge at point of need keeps work flowing. Share a
subject matter expert list so people know who to ask
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Create an internal SME list</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>09-Feb-15 Company kudos is often reward enough to engage your
experts in sharing what they know. Personally engage them
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Share kudos</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>10-Feb-15 It’s not just about engaging with your experts. It’s
valuable to hear from all, everyone offers something
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Engage with everyone</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>26-Feb-15 Try organising cross-department lunches. You never know
what people might learn #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Cross-department pollination</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>13-Mar-15 Don’t ever assume based on age. Changing workplace
learning may be hard for younger more than older staff
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Be mindful of mindsets</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>07-Apr-15 Long weekend refreshed? Now is the time to grab
stakeholder’s energy for new projects. Have great chats today
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Be energy aware</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>24-Apr-15 Get in on conversations and projects early to affect
the maximum learning opportunities #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Get in early</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>02-Jun-15 Command &amp; control culture stifles innovation. Buck
this trend. Prove concepts to gain trust in your changes
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Build trust</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>23-Jun-15 Keep up to date with new tech &amp; ideas via advocacy
from your network. Their story can help define your story
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Learn from your network</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>04-Aug-15 Treating learners as adults, allowing adult to adult
learning conversations lowers risk &amp; garners trust
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Treat people as adults</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><span id="05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml_page_67" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 67" role="doc-pagebreak"></span>25-Aug-15 Stand in the
shoes of your customer. What do they need? Why do they need it? What
will work for them? #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Be (internal) customer focused</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>07-Sep-15 Think of ways to engage with people, not just those who
are like us or who do the things we do. #Creativity #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Seek out new and quiet voices</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>30-Oct-15 Explicit stakeholder support is needed for learning as
everyday culture. Talk regularly with your stakeholders
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Talk regularly to stakeholders</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>24-Nov-15 Little victories can come as simply as conversations
with senior stakeholders #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Have good conversations</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>27-Nov-15 In a quest for little victories be respectful in order
to get anything done. It’s unhelpful to gain a bad rep
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Be respectful</strong></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
</figure>

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (3.4)" class="box" id="_05_CHAPTER_C03_sec_006" role="complementary">

<figure id="_05_CHAPTER_C03_UFigure_3_6" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF006.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Can you describe your learning offer in two sentences?

-   Do you know what you stand for in L&D?

-   Who are your stakeholders? How can you get to speak with them?

-   What are the business problems your stakeholders are trying to
    solve?

-   Are you avoiding difficult conversations? Why? What will change
    that?

-   Can you turn resistors into advocates? Find experiences and share
    them.

-   Do people want to eat your cake?

-   Can you afford not to engage with stakeholders?

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (3.5)" class="box" id="_05_CHAPTER_C03_sec_007" role="complementary">

<figure id="_05_CHAPTER_C03_UFigure_3_7" class="figure">
<p><span id="05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml_page_68" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 68" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF007.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Don't operate as an island.

-   Draw up your who's who of stakeholders.

-   Plot your constellations of influencers and detractors.

-   Invite people for strategic lattes.

-   Speak to the people those first wave of invitees speak to.

-   Build relationships.

-   Build up a true picture of your organisation and what makes it tick.

-   Make cake that people want.

-   Be humble and bring out the best in people.

-   Be generous with your time.

</aside>

::: {#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml__05_CHAPTER_C03_sec_008 .section .references .bibliography aria-label="_THE LIBRARY LIST (3.7)" role="doc-bibliography"}
<figure id="_05_CHAPTER_C03_UFigure_3_8" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF008.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Johnson, G, Scholes K, and Whittington, R (2005) *Exploring
    Corporate Strategy*, Pearson Education, Harlow

-   Lancaster, A (2019) *Driving Performance Through Learning*, Kogan
    Page, London

-   Marquet, D (2012) *Turn The Ship Around*, Portfolio Penguin, London

-   Pettigrew, I (2011) The Strategic Latte, *Kingfisher Coaching*
    \[online\]
    [[www.kingfishercoaching.com/the-strategic-latte/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.kingfishercoaching.com/the-strategic-latte/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/GZF9-D8Z9]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/GZF9-D8Z9))

-   Renshaw, B (2020) *Being*, LID Publishing, London

-   Shackleton-Jones, N (2019) *How People Learn*, Kogan Page, London

-   Thomsett, M (2005) *Getting Started in Six Sigma: A practical
    working guide*, Wiley, London
:::

::: {#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml__05_CHAPTER_C03_sec_009 .section .endnotes aria-labelledby="_05_CHAPTER_C03_h1_009"}
# []{#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml_page_69 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 69" role="doc-pagebreak"}Notes {#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml__05_CHAPTER_C03_h1_009 .title}

[1](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml__05_CHAPTER_C03_Endnote_3_1_reference) Daly, J
(2020) *Back to the Future: Why tomorrow's workforce needs a learning
culture*, Emerald Works, London p67

[2](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml__05_CHAPTER_C03_Endnote_3_2_reference) The
concept of company constellations was introduced to me by Haider Imam at
Tao Leadership- see
[[www.culturbook.io/#/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.culturbook.io/#/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/GV84-H2SG]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/GV84-H2SG)).
In addition, Harold Jarche shared David Ronfeldt's tribalism ideas in
constellations:
[[www.jarche.com/2017/10/cities-and-the-future-of-work/]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.jarche.com/2017/10/cities-and-the-future-of-work/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/9YWF-ZTN9]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/9YWF-ZTN9))
:::

[]{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

<div>

[]{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_70 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 70"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[[04]{.ordinal
.ordinal}](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_06_CHAPTER_C04_sec_001)

# [Consultative L&D](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_06_CHAPTER_C04_sec_001) {#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_h1_001 .title}

Gathering evidence to ensure a future learning direction through
consultancy techniques and impactful questions in order to make learning
effective

</div>

<figure id="_06_CHAPTER_C04_UFigure_4_1" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF001.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

Consider what the L&D team is to an organisation, what its purpose
really is. We've already explored how, historically, we have been fixing
things, but it might be time to let that go. We can show better value by
being a critical friend rather than being a fixer. As a critical friend,
we need to dispel the myth that learning and development is a business
cost to pay when things go wrong. Instead, we can help the business see
gaps, we can support and engage people and help them to improve. This
way, what we do will have a direct impact on an organisation's bottom
line.

Let's explore why, how, and what to do (and stop doing) to be
consultative in L&D. Moving from being a fixer to being a critical
friend requires a shift in mindset and approach for the more
transactional L&Der. It requires us to stop doing something that we love
and are good at -- immediately coming up with solutions or
'solutioneering'. How to design and deliver learning is the foundation
of our work. It's what we like to do, and it's usually what the business
wants us to do too. For years, our industry has been measured on it --
trainers, training hours, 'trainer-tainment'. We are creative people,
and often excitable people. Having started my career in the face-to-face
training space, having been made redundant from a trainer role, and
later []{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_71 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 71"
role="doc-pagebreak"}having had several years in consultancy, I can see
clearly that learning solutions are just one part of the whole value
chain (discussed in [Chapter 5](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml)). We need to hold
back and take our time; there are many vital steps that need to be taken
before we reach the solutions stage if we want to ensure those solutions
have longevity and bear real fruit for the business. Fruit doesn't grow
overnight.

As an alternative to jumping to solutions, I advocate for a consultative
approach. When you consult with someone, first you seek information
intensely. Consulting involves digging deep to understand well. It
involves considering the whole situation, not just a superficial glance.
When consulting, you ask lots of good questions. It's a conversation, an
exchange of ideas and views. It's a mix of talking and listening --
mostly listening -- particularly in the early stages of the process.
(For more on listening, I recommend Nancy Kline's book *Time to Think*.)
Your focus is to understand organisational problems by seeking answers,
rather than offering them yourself at this stage.

Good consultative L&D is more than listening to people about specific
business problems, though. Before you even enter into those detailed
conversations, you need to know the bigger picture so that you can look
at individual business problems in relation to the wider organisational
perspective. That means knowing the context, the organisational
strategy, and having a good overview of the business, the situations it
faces, and your role within that. It may even be wider still and include
knowing the market, the competitors, the customers -- all in line with
looking taller and wider.

Armed with strategy and contextual knowledge, plus a list of who you
want to speak to about this, where do you start as a consultative L&D
professional? I recommend you start from a point of curiosity. Seek to
understand more. Harold Jarche talks about 'Seek, Sense and Share' in
his Personal Knowledge Mastery blog in respect of the curation of
learning[]{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_Endnote_4_1_reference
.anchor}^[1](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_Endnote_4_1)^. I
actually think it is a really good approach for consultancy too. Seek
out information, help people to make sense of it, and share it back with
them. Not quite how Jarche intended it to be used, but a reminder that
inspiration can come from anywhere if we remain open to it.

A good understanding of organisational development is also key to
successful consultancy. Think about what evidence you need and where to
find it. Digging for data is a key part of consultative L&D. Draw on
your knowledge, your experience and also your gut instinct. People can
be wary of using gut instinct, but actually it's a very important part
of the process, as long as you investigate what your gut instinct tells
you and seek evidence to []{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_72 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 72" role="doc-pagebreak"}support it, or dispel it -- be
open-minded in your quest. In academic circles, what we call gut
instinct is known as recognition-primed decision
making[]{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_Endnote_4_2_reference
.anchor}^[2](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_Endnote_4_2)^. Watch
your bias, but do listen to your experience.

There are many models out there on how to consult -- this book isn't the
place to discuss all the relative merits of each, although we will
explore a few. Rather, this is a place for looking at consultancy models
through an L&D lens, which is not where all consultancy models sit
naturally. There are myths about consultancy which we will seek to
dispel on our journey from what Andrew Jacobs, L&D transformation lead
at HMRC, describes as 'shopkeepers' serving courses to become
'engineers', crafting learning solutions to real business problems, as
mentioned in [Chapter
1](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml)[]{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_Endnote_4_3_reference
.anchor}^[3](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_Endnote_4_3)^.

<figure id="_06_CHAPTER_C04_UFigure_4_2" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF002.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

[Myth busting](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_06_CHAPTER_C04_h3_001)

Myth one: consultants come into organisations and 'tell'

In this case, I suggest you have the wrong consultant. A good consultant
listens. A lot. If you have an expensive external consultant coming into
your organisation telling you what to do, think and say, get a new one!
The most effective consulting I have witnessed in my career was internal
people asking other internal people lots of effective questions -- as
you will see in the case study below. The truth is that anybody can be a
consultant within an organisation and the purest (and I would say best)
form of consultancy is listening and asking good questions; certainly
not telling nor charging high sums for that.

Myth two: it's hugely expensive

Not necessarily. Consultancy takes time, dedication, an open mind and
curiosity. Bringing consultants into an organisation on a clear brief
actually saves money in the long run due to the mitigation of risk, a
right first time fix and effective systemic change. A great consultant
can actually therefore save you lots of money. Would you rather spend
thousands on a leadership programme in which you are confident of the
outcomes following con­sultancy, or on one you think might work without
actually knowing? []{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_73 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 73" role="doc-pagebreak"}A consultant will ask enough
open, effective questions enough times to enough people to know they
make a difference. Despite being an L&D consultant, I am a big supporter
of in-house consultancy -- hence this chapter. Whilst not entirely
cost-free as it still takes time and dedication, you know your context,
so if you can helicopter above that (and your bias and history),
internal consultancy is effective and hugely valuable. Indeed, my
question to you is: how can you afford NOT to take a consultative
approach to everything in L&D? If you want long-lasting learning
solutions that work, you need the right foundations, and, in my
experience, you can only get them by starting with strategy,
stakeholders and consultancy.

[Fixer or critical
friend?](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_06_CHAPTER_C04_h3_002)

The heart of this chapter is about moving from fixing issues straight
away to being a critical friend. If we are always fixing things, we
never get to the stage where we can proactively support business needs,
as we are always on the back foot, reacting to what we get asked to fix.
It's crucial to move from fixing reactively to supporting proactively;
to be in a position where we are solving problems before people even
know there are problems. This is our role as a critical friend --
someone who is looking out for our organisation and the people inside it
with useful, helpful, honest and clear eyes. We speak our truth
constructively and reassuringly.

Once we layer in the hierarchies and history of an organisation, plus
the emotions and experiences of the human beings within it, consultancy
is not always as simple as it may sound. So how do we move from concept
to reality? I believe we start as simply as we can, with conversations,
questions and evidence gathering. It is critical, however, that in
starting asking questions we ask the right questions. Asking people what
development they need, or what L&D can do for them, is not the best
start. It is difficult for people to see and articulate learning needs.
If you ask 'What do you need to learn?', people will default to courses
because we have been raised in that setting for decades. Andy Lancaster
talks critically about learning needs analysis and concludes that is it
the word 'learning' which is problematic (Lancaster, 2019). That word
leads the conversation before it has even started. Good consultancy
starts by asking the open, sometimes difficult, challenging or awkward
questions to get to the real needs. As Lancaster concludes, 'We need to
up the game when it comes to diagnosing genuine learning needs'.

[]{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_74 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 74"
role="doc-pagebreak"}A metaphorical illustration of why we need to be
better at diagnosing L&D needs can be seen in railway track repairs. At
work, a trackside engineer is reactive, simply mending the piece of
broken track in front of them. They can see the track they are fixing,
but don't know the impact on the wider network. A regional network
engineer oversees the whole track and has the bigger picture, enabling
proactive planning of when to do what repairs to the tracks. A customer
sees the train is late and doesn't care about the tracks at all. In L&D,
our customer is key, but do we do the groundwork to get the bigger
picture of the whole network, or do we fix just what is in front of us
without quite knowing the impact of that? Or, are we laying the track as
the train is running behind us, just to service our customer's wishes?

Recognising that nothing in life stands still, the journey to effective
learning needs lies in becoming a proactive, big-picture critical friend
in our work rather than a reactive fixer, focused only on what is in
front of us.

[Find your
evidence](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_06_CHAPTER_C04_h3_003)

In the quest to know what your organisation really needs, an
evidence-informed approach is fundamental to implementing good and
effective L&D
practice[]{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_Endnote_4_4_reference
.anchor}^[4](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_Endnote_4_4)^. In
their book *Evidence Informed Learning Design*, Neelen and Kirschner
distinguish between evidence-based and evidence-informed (Neelen &
Kirschner, 2020). I like the distinction, because whilst the trend in
the people profession is towards evidence-based, sometimes we have to
accept we have no base of evidence, at least not yet, but we do need to
be informed about what we have and seek more.

When I was doing the research for this chapter, I contacted Rob Briner,
Professor of Organisational Psychology at Queen Mary London and a
founding member of the Center for Evidence-Based Management. Rob is the
biggest advocate of evidence-based practice I know, so I asked him for a
case study on who is using such practice well in L&D. At the time, he
simply replied 'no one'. He knows lots of people who are moving towards
an evidence-based approach, but they aren't yet quite there at the time
of writing. Evidence-based practice has huge momentum and popularity,
but it is disappointing, even astonishing, that Rob couldn't point me in
the direction of a solid L&D case study. Surely, as a profession, if we
are advocating for evidence informing our practice, we should be doing
better now. Even this book is not overly referenced, nor does it, on the
whole, point to evidence for the ideas shared within. In your own
settings, you will need to find out []{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_75
.pagebreak aria-label="Page 75" role="doc-pagebreak"}how much
referencing your organisation expects of you, and bring in the evidence
in the most appropriate way.

While Rob Briner couldn't share a specific case study, he gave me some
useful guidance for better evidence-based practice when I interviewed
him on Learning Now TV in 2018. He cited four sources of evidence:

1.  What stakeholders think and believe.

2.  What the scientific evidence about the nature of the problem is
    telling us.

3.  Your organisational data.

4.  Your own professional expertise.

The good news is, there is always evidence. Quite a lot of evidence, in
fact, if you look at all those sources. Rob encourages the use of
multiple sources, to correlate and validate evidence. He cautions us to
think carefully and clearly about where to find evidence and what it
looks like for you; consider your biases and step back. In addition, in
the LNTV interview Rob talked about how we shouldn't look for evidence
to prove our pre-determined outcome or look for evidence we 'need':

> ...asking better questions often starts not with a solution that you
> might want to implement or a particular training programme or
> something that you want to do. It starts with trying to understand
> whether there truly is a problem or not...We shouldn't really want to
> implement a solution.

Once you start discovering where your evidence is, you will be
pleasantly surprised how much there is -- financial accounts, post-event
'happy sheets', staff 360s, customer feedback, complaints, industry
sector research such as Emerald Works (formerly Towards Maturity)
benchmarking reports -- and where it leads you, plus you will be able to
identify what is missing. Rob offers a good challenge to the L&D
community, highlighting we need to do more in order to get better at
evidence-based practice. For evidence to inform our work, we need to not
only seek it out, but also understand what it is telling us.

[Consultative L&D
questioning](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_06_CHAPTER_C04_h3_004)

What does evidence-informed L&D look like in practice, particularly in
terms of consultative L&D? Good questions are key for gathering evidence
to understand the issues in your business. But what constitutes a good
[]{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_76 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 76"
role="doc-pagebreak"}question? On a simple level, a good question is one
that digs deep, is open ended and doesn't assume an answer. A good
question invites people to talk, invites them to describe the future
view without getting too lost or caught up in the past. A good question
will help us to determine a good answer. We can start with why. So what?
Then, what more?

On a more complex level, there are some consultancy models which might
help us stretch from our starting position to consultative L&D.

Values-led consulting

In my consulting experience, being values led helps people be clear on
what is being offered prior to a conversation, by framing and setting
the premise for it. In my business, Kairos Modern Learning, I live by
three values: challenge, excellence and transparency. These values are
at the heart of my consultancy business framework. It is simply how I
live out my truth of ensuring that time with me is time well spent.

Challenge

What does challenge mean in a consultancy context? It reminds us to
kindly, generously, simply and honestly, but not rudely nor
confrontationally, ask the difficult questions that people so often shy
away from. This is not to be belligerent -- I only ask clients difficult
questions if they need to be asked. If they are not asked, we (the
client and I) might not get to the truth together. It is only when truth
is out there, openly with understanding on all sides, that we can move
to modern learning in context, with realistic and practical confidence.
Sometimes, people can't see the truth, even when it's right in front of
them. This might be because they are blind to it, or their thinking is
muddled, or they are scared of the reality so it's easier not to look.
The task and the opportunity for us in L&D is to open people's eyes. I
start this process by asking the questions my clients don't ask
themselves, particularly around strategy. Also, it is not just asking
the tough questions of other people; I ask them of myself too. I think
it is just as important to question yourself as it is to question
others, reflecting on every conversation, learning and growing from each
experience.

The biggest challenge question can be 'why?' It is also sometimes the
hardest for people to answer. Asking why can be tricky for L&D too,
especially if we L&Ders haven't asked it in the past, or if L&D is not
very well respected or is without senior sponsors in a business
hierarchy. We are often used to simply doing as we are asked, such as
providing courses for []{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_77 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 77" role="doc-pagebreak"}compliance. Asking why may
feel strange for both us as practitioners and the people we work with
given the traditional 'shopkeeper' role discussed previously. If you
have always been a transactional L&Der and people in the business are
used to you providing what is asked for, how will people react when you
change tack and ask why? It could be awkward, it could be difficult.
However, it could also be helpful and fruitful. Perhaps any difficulties
are mental obstacles that L&Ders put before themselves in order not to
change. Instead of creating these obstacles and predicting the
negatives, consider breaking down the obstacles and looking for the
positives. The experience of being asked why could be empowering,
enlightening and engaging. Summon your courage -- one of the five
superpowers Lucinda Carney talks about in *How to be a Change Super
Hero* -- and try challenging with a 'why?' (Carney, 2020).

'Why?' is difficult because so many businesses look for quick fixes. In
challenging these, we are asking people to do the harder work of really
digging into systemic realities and testing the edges of the box that
learning sits within. Again, we risk stepping onto the toes of our OD
colleagues here when we think of systemic change. However, it is
necessary for our learning solutions to be rooted in enough truth to
have clear boundaries and expectations, plus an agreed willingness from
people to change so that learning will be successful. This is the real
challenge of L&D's why.

Success depends on how you challenge. Don't challenge in an aggressive
or arrogant way, rather in a gentle and helpful way. If your challenge
comes from a place of kindness and humility, from a place of trying to
do better and offer a more effective solution, chances are it will be
well received. If 'why?' feels too confrontational when you are asked
for learning support, consider offering these gentle challenge questions
instead;

-   What would be different for you afterwards?

-   What is the thing that frustrates you now that you would like to
    change?

-   What does ideal look like?

Excellence

The next value I like to offer is excellence. It is important that L&D
can be relied upon to be excellent in all we offer and do. How I see
this manifested is being on top of our game at all times. I believe
continued professional development (CPD) needs to be standard practice
for L&Ders -- we need to practice what we preach. Your organisation
deserves to be assured of your excellence. Personally, I am an avid
consumer of industry conferences, []{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_78
.pagebreak aria-label="Page 78" role="doc-pagebreak"}webinars, blogs,
podcasts and social channels, and I reflect on my experiences a great
deal to ensure my practice remains relevant. How I support my CPD is
personal to me; you need to find your own way to suit you. Whilst I, and
anyone in your PLN, can make CPD suggestions -- for example, listen to
one of the many industry podcasts available such as the Good Practice
Podcast, or join in \@LnDconnect's Friday #LDinsight Twitter chats, or
join in a co-working day with \@LnDcowork, or offer to live tweet from
an industry event -- only you can truly know what works for
you[]{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_Endnote_4_5_reference
.anchor}^[5](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_Endnote_4_5)^.
Personalise your CPD however you like and need. The point here is to
make sure you do it. We must walk the talk. We must maintain excellence.
You must partake in regular learning, and also reflect on it, apply it,
and shout about it. Otherwise, how can our organisations trust our work?
How can we feel what our learners feel if we never walk in their shoes?
How can people be encouraged by L&D to take learning seriously and see
the value it brings? Excellence is a benchmark standard for L&D, in my
view!

Transparency

My third value of transparency speaks to the heart of my consultancy
ethos. I am very open and honest. Transparency in the consulting process
also includes transparency in the evidence gathered, how it is gathered,
and how it is interpreted. It is easy to make assumptions, jump to
conclusions, and be tempted to repeat what worked last time. However,
these behaviours can lead to not listening well. Transparency keeps
everyone in check.

The first part of consulting is contracting. There's nothing more
frustrating than not knowing where you stand with someone or something.
When you go into a process, you need to have clear boundaries and
expectations, whether this is knowing costs (both time and currency), or
the expectations of open and honest conversations, or both sides
understanding outcomes. I think it's really important that people
understand that L&D is here to help and how that help will eventually
manifest, but first there is a transparent process of good conversations
to go through.

How to 'call it out' is a standard part of the agreement in contracting.
The ability to raise a flag on the conversation or the process in a way
that doesn't assign blame has to be included for open, transparent work.
Again, the ability to say no, kindly communicated with the aim to reach
better solutions, perhaps in reference to a lack of evidence, or to
challenge assumptions or biases, is a very adult-to-adult approach, to
allude to Berne's transactional
analysis[]{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_Endnote_4_6_reference
.anchor}^[6](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_Endnote_4_6)^.
Working at that higher level of non-competitive, non-ego, even
non-emotional experience is not always easy given the complexities of
the []{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_79 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 79"
role="doc-pagebreak"}human condition. It can only work if the
contracting piece is well executed initially. When this is the case,
consulting for L&D is a joy and the outcomes are truly remarkable.

Together, these three values of challenge, excellence and transparency
are the foundations of Kairos Modern Learning's L&D consultancy. These
values have stood the test of time. I invite you to consider what values
you or your organisation offer and how they can suggest a new lens
through which to consider your L&D consultancy, in-house or external.

Flawless Consulting

Peter Block, author, consultant and OD expert, shared his Flawless
Consulting model several decades ago '...to shift people's narrative
from what's wrong with us to what's possible for us' (Block, 2011). The
model is based on authenticity, which is no doubt why it appeals to me.
The model offers three ways in which consultancy can play out.

Expert

Block suggests that when the consultant is the expert, they are brought
in to gather evidence and diagnose the problem. The implementation of
any solution is handed over to the 'client' as the expert's work is
completed. From an L&D perspective, getting more into the diagnosis
space is immensely useful, but not a strength that many in L&D have at
the moment. We are usually on the delivery end of the expert's
suggestions.

Pair of hands

In this definition, Block talks of consultants coming in after the
evidence gathering has been done by the 'client'. The consultant is
there to provide solutions without necessarily having got to the bottom
of the issues themselves. The 'client' doesn't learn how to help
themselves and the consultant remains expendable beyond the edges of the
project. From an L&D perspective, this is typically where we operate at
the moment, reactive to information provided to us. We are a safe pair
of hands, rolling our sleeves up, and doing a fine job of providing
solutions.

Collaborative consulting

Block identifies a third way; a full end-to-end process consultant. In
this scenario, both client and consultant run the whole project
together, from evidence gathering to diagnosing the issues to creating
solutions to the issues. From an L&D perspective, this is an ideal
scenario as it brings us []{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_80 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 80" role="doc-pagebreak"}in early enough to really get
a handle on the issues, it supports our credibility as a learning
expert, and defines our knowledge as having currency within our
organisation. It helps us to be clear on the problem we are solving
together and how we will know when it is solved. Such clear measurement
helps us prove our value. That kind of end-to-end consultancy using
external consultants can get expensive, simply due to the amount of work
required to do it well. As such, it is the perfect scenario for internal
consultancy to show real value.

Block's model can help you identify how ripe your organisation is for
consultative L&D. Does L&D have currency within the organisation, i.e.
are people willing to spend time or money on L&D's suggestions? Is L&D
seen as simply a safe pair of hands? Are external consultants used for
L&D projects? Why?

It actually doesn't matter at this stage where you are within Block's
model. What does matter is that you *know* where you are. You need to
know what your organisation thinks of you and your role. If you are
deemed a safe pair of hands, then perhaps consultancy is not your place
just yet. If you pile in with why questions, no matter how kindly
delivered, they may not be well received. Think about how you could take
on the role as learning expert, to move away from being seen as someone
who delivers what other people expect.

The good news is that being a safe pair of hands means that you are
trusted, and trust is a key ingredient for consultancy. On top of trust,
you need to build up a reputation for knowing your stuff. There are many
ways you could do that, such as starting a company learning newsletter
in which you suggest good questions for people to ask themselves before
coming to L&D. For example:

-   Before you ask for a course, have you considered how you will
    measure its success?

-   If you have learning budget to spend, have you considered the return
    on the investment you are looking for?

-   If you look at L&D as 'a safe pair of hands', have you considered
    what more we can offer?

You can then highlight those other offers, such as problem solving,
facilitation, data mining and cross-departmental understanding, for
example.

Other ways you can break into the expert status is to be sure to
celebrate learning achievements, as we will discuss further in [Chapter
14](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml). You can []{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_81
.pagebreak aria-label="Page 81" role="doc-pagebreak"}also ask to shadow
any external consultants coming in for your own CPD. You could shadow
project managers too. However you choose to get the ball rolling on how
you can be trusted beyond delivering what people expect of you, get to
it. L&D can be much more than a safe pair of hands.

Performance Consulting

The final model to consider is Nigel Harrison's Performance Consulting.
I recommend this consulting model because it has L&D in mind. It is a
seven-step model which is great for helping stakeholders self-identify
the consequences of not taking action. That action might not be
learning, but the model can surface
that[]{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_Endnote_4_7_reference
.anchor}^[7](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_Endnote_4_7)^. I
offer you a précis here to whet your appetite.

*Step one* is contracting -- determining when and with whom to have the
discussion about a situation, and with what expected end. How will you
arrive at addressing 'what is the actual problem you are trying to
solve'?

*Step two* is all about determining who all the stakeholders are in the
given situation. We've already covered the value of stakeholder
engagement earlier on in this book, but it just goes to show that
stakeholders are at the heart of every successful learning and
development solution.

*Step three* is about the current issue, which Harrison calls 'the
presenting problem'. What is happening now that you don't want to keep
happening?

*Step four* describes the future view -- draw a picture of what it would
look like if the problem went away. What would performance be like? What
would people be saying? How would people be acting? What would customers
be saying? The more colourful the picture, the better.

*Step five* is the key to the success of Harrison's model, in my
opinion, as it asks: what is the cost of the gap? The gap is between
what is happening now and what could be happening in the future. What is
the cost of doing nothing? Think broadly here, we are not talking simply
financial cost. For a consultant in L&D, this is gold. This gap
demonstrates how we will measure the success of the intervention that we
will put in place. We've got a very clear view of the move from the
current to the future situation. If we can do anything to support moving
to that future view, we've demonstrated how we can help and where we've
added value.

*Step six* is about understanding the solutions. Harrison talks about
knowledge, skills, motivation and environment. It really works when you
break down any solution into these future-view arenas: what knowledge
will people have, what skills will they have, what will motivate people,
and what environment do they need in order to learn? ([Chapter
9](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml) offers much more on environment.)

[]{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_82 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 82"
role="doc-pagebreak"}*Step seven* is the action plan, offered in
Harrison's model as who, what and when. This step is perhaps a bit weak,
as I see that building an action plan isn't just as simple as saying
this is what we are going to do. I think we also need to talk about
behaviours and expectations as part of an action plan. The who, what and
when doesn't go far enough for me unless it has a timeline, commitments,
accountabilities -- more of a project plan as well as an action plan.
However, this is a personal opinion of an otherwise solid model which
works really well for an L&D setting.

Ultimately, the beauty of this seven-step approach is the identification
of the measurement for success and the stakeholder buy-in. Because the
cost of the gap is clearly surfaced, there is clarity in establishing
where we are now and where we will be in the future. It is obvious what
progress needs to be made. The success comes, of course, from
demonstrating L&D has helped make that shift. And it all starts with the
types of questions we ask.

Of course, no one model will fit every context so don't feel wedded to a
complete approach. Use whatever helps you ask better questions. Just as
I think behaviour and expectations need to be added to Harrison's model,
you may want to take your own approach with any of the suggestions, and
that is absolutely fine. When you have that first consultative
conversation with someone, you need to feel confident in the process so
it doesn't feel daunting when you start. You can't just charge in with
'Why do you want me to do that?' You need to be able to gently ask the
why questions. You need to tap into the things that are the real
business issues and strategies. You need to highlight the risk of doing
nothing. Being consultative enables you to look at old and familiar
problems with fresh eyes.

[And, finally, learning
solutions](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_06_CHAPTER_C04_h3_005)

We have understood what consultancy means. We have understood the
business problems we are trying to solve. We have understood what the
evidence is telling us and we have considered our approach to
consultancy in our context. It is now and only now that we can think
about learning solutions, if indeed all this work has surfaced the need
for learning -- it may not have! It feels like a long way into a long
chapter before we finally get to the time for solutions. There are a lot
of steps to adopting consultative L&D; trust the process. Let's look at
an example to bring it to life; meet Bob in Sales.

Bob needs a sales course. Or so I'm told by his boss following Bob's
performance review. This is a very transactional moment; in the old days
[]{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_83 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 83"
role="doc-pagebreak"}the typical response would have been something
along the lines of 'Yes, absolutely, which course would you like him to
go on? What's your budget?' But we know better now. 'Which course?' is
no longer a good enough question to ensure effective, engaging learning.
To make this situation more valuable and to get to the heart of the
matter, a consultative approach is required. As a bare minimum, we need
to know why Bob needs a sales course. What is Bob struggling with
specifically? What is Bob not struggling with? What L&D have we tried
before with Bob? What evidence do we have? What are Bob's KPIs and
therefore his motivation? What if we do nothing for Bob? What is the
future view? What would a positive future view look like?

You need to ask these consultancy questions in order to identify a
direction and measurement for Bob's possible learning pathway. Once you
get your answers and understand what's going on, a clearly defined
picture and business metrics appear in the analysis. You have evidence.
With evidence, you can build solutions based on facts, not assumptions.

So, you gently ask Bob and his boss the questions and you discover that
Bob struggles with closing deals. He closes only four deals out of 10,
regularly losing out on six good leads. The best sales person closes
eight out of 10, losing only two. Bob has been on several sales courses
in the past. Bob's job is now on the line.

Now you have something tangible to work with. Knowing what you know now,
would you send Bob on a generic sales course? You could actually offer
something much more targeted, much more useful and relevant to him and
the organisation. You can have another conversation with Bob and his
boss to co-create effective learning options.

Let me indulge the solutioneer in you here -- what would you suggest?

I'll play too. Instead of the generic course, we could arrange for Bob
to shadow some great people who are deal closers. We can point him to
useful material online showing how to close deals. Perhaps offer a
specific 'closing deals' course. Give him a journal to reflect on all
the deals he loses and a mentor to discuss them with. To be honest,
there are many directions we can take. Whatever learning intervention is
decided upon, it is specific to Bob's needs and we have clear measures,
therefore there is a higher likelihood that it will work. Bob too is
more engaged because he is getting help with something he is struggling
with which directly relates to both his needs and the needs of the
organisation.

[]{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_84 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 84"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[Career
management](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_06_CHAPTER_C04_h3_006)

So Bob is happy. We have gathered some evidence, correlated across
multiple sources, consulted with the stakeholders, and given Bob a
personalised solution which helps him stay in his job.

Or have we? We have facilitated Bob's learning journey, but it is only
Bob who can determine whether the intervention is successful. Career
management doesn't belong to L&D. It belongs to people; in this case,
Bob. Bob has to take ownership and responsibility for his career
development and where that can take him. It amazes me that people are
accountable for all areas of their adult life -- having children, moving
home, going on holiday -- but when it comes to learning we have a
tradition that it is done unto us. We hear 'I've not had any learning
this year'. What does that even mean? People have blindly and idly
walked through their working life without noticing all the things they
have learnt along the way. They mean they have not been on any courses.
But we cannot allow people to abdicate from their role in their own
learning. They are responsible for their career management, and that
means noticing and taking responsibility for their own learning.

If neither Bob nor his manager are used to taking ownership of their own
learning -- and by default their own careers -- you'll perhaps need to
do a bit of guiding initially. You'll need to steer people in the right
direction, encouraging self-directed learning beyond any course,
mentoring, learning, etc. You will need to signpost learning for as long
as is necessary for Bob to realise that he is the master of his own
destiny. The first and vital step was getting him engaged, getting him
and his managers on board. Beyond that, Bob is actually, ultimately, on
his own.

<aside aria-label="Case-Study (4.1)" class="case-study" epub:type="case-study" id="_06_CHAPTER_C04_sec_002" role="complementary">

<figure id="_06_CHAPTER_C04_UFigure_4_3" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF003.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

I worked with Virtual College in 2018. They were well known in the
industry for their award-winning e-learning content. They were
struggling to break out of that image, as they actually had a lot more
on offer. I was approached by the Head of Sales & Learning, Hayley Khan,
to write a consultative L&D programme for the sales team. In short, I
[]{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_85 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 85"
role="doc-pagebreak"}refused, but we had a long chat until I was able to
offer her something much more meta, something they could feel, something
that gave them stories whilst also solving their own problem. Hayley
picks up the story.

**CURIOSITY**

**by Hayley Khan, Virtual College**

The Background

Virtual College was going through a period of rapid change and growth.
As part of a restructure, we consolidated our Sales team, moving away
from tactical and transactional sales to a consultation model. To form a
'Virtual College' approach to consultation, upskilling was required.

Meanwhile, Virtual College recognised its place in the learning
technologies market as the 'Most Learner Focused' organisation. Putting
our learners at the heart of every solution is the route to successful
learning and development interventions.

There was no off-the-shelf product we found which met our needs, and we
recognised that a one-off training intervention would not be suitable
for such a culture change.

Our Head of Sales and Learning met with Michelle, who proposed an
innovative approach: Meta Learning. This would challenge individuals,
who would normally attend a training day, to build the programme
themselves through a consultation exercise. The meeting highlighted that
consultation runs through the whole customer experience with Virtual
College. This includes the design and development of our digital
solutions; those involved must process information and make decisions,
so their expertise is essential in consultation.

This approach would upskill individuals from across Virtual College, who
would then create a cross-company programme, instilling peer-to
peer-learning in a sustainable way, and putting our own internal
learners at the heart of the solution.

> What do we get if we do what we've always done? The same as we've
> always had.

First steps

The programme started with a facilitated masterclass. Speakers from the
industry gave their insights into the past, present and future of L&D,
drawing on their broad industry knowledge and their own personal
experiences.

The masterclass centred around the challenge of coming up with new ideas
and how to implement them in a way that people would embrace. The
masterclass was held at an outdoor activity centre in the countryside,
deliberately designed to raise curiosity, to take people out of their
preconceived ideas of a masterclass setting, to encourage them to think
differently. It was inspirational and the group left full of energy and
enthusiasm, ready to face the challenge assigned to them.

> []{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_86 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 86"
> role="doc-pagebreak"}How could we decide what the solution is, if we
> don't know our goals?

At our second session, we were asked to be creative without focusing on
the end goal, thinking instead about what makes learning effective and
how we might go about creating a learning programme.

This session left us feeling overwhelmed; instead of feeling excited,
the group now felt that there was a huge task ahead and no clear way of
tackling it.

We began meeting weekly, whilst individually curating content and
feeding it back. This self-directed approach, where individual curiosity
was encouraged, brought the group together and allowed us to break the
challenge into manageable chunks, ultimately focusing on four points
within the development cycle which became our learner journey:
collaboration and sharing, self-reflection and curation, experience,
learning / curiosity...

> The future belongs to the curious. The ones who are not afraid to try
> it, explore it, poke at it and turn it inside out.

Try, fail quickly, evolve, and succeed

Colleague engagement was vital, and we wanted to promote the idea of
'curiosity'. To create interest through mystery, we sent a company-wide
email entitled 'What does being consultative mean to you?'
Unfortunately, a large portion of the business reported it as spam.
Gradually, we got better at viewing things from other people's
perspective and a buzz about curiosity began to take hold.

We developed an internal definition of consultation: 'Listening, asking
the right questions, working collaboratively and using our expertise to
provide recommendations that put the learner at the heart of the
solution'. We asked colleagues to identify the skills and behaviours of
a consultant and used these as topics for the programme.

<figure id="_06_CHAPTER_C04_Figure_4_1" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M06NF001.png"
alt="The figure shows a flowchart describing consultant skills and behaviors." /></p>
<details id="_06_CHAPTER_C04_Figure_4_1-details">
<summary>
Figure 4.1 details
</summary>
<p>The skills of a consultant are as follows:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Analysis of client needs</p></li>
<li><p>Adult learning theories and design models</p></li>
<li><p>Project management</p></li>
<li><p>Tech know-how and learning tech</p></li>
<li><p>Persuasion and listening skills; communication</p></li>
<li><p>Creating and suggesting solutions</p></li>
<li><p>Sector-specific knowledge</p></li>
<li><p>Working collaboratively and constructive feedback</p></li>
</ul>
<p>The behaviors of a consultant include the following:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Coaching</p></li>
<li><p>Reflection</p></li>
<li><p>Application</p></li>
<li><p>Collaboration</p></li>
</ul>
<p>All skills and behaviors are influenced by confidence in challenging
current thinking, and developing a growth mindset.</p>
</details>
<figcaption><p><a
href="#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml#loi_06_CHAPTER_C04_Figure_4_1"><span
class="label">Figure</span> <span class="ordinal">4.1</span> Virtual
College</a></p></figcaption>
</figure>

Our research led us away from a prescriptive means of training, in
favour of allowing learners to explore resources for themselves. In this
way, learners naturally discovered that their passion was shared by
others. We proposed delivery through 'fireside chats', mentors, speakers
and events. We would provide books and journals, and encouraged
colleagues to curate resources, creating a culture of continuous
learning. Activities would be underpinned by a collaborative platform
that would grow organically as colleagues shared learning materials for
reflection and discussion.

Our proposal required a complete culture change, so we were aware that
this could be a difficult sell! The Leadership Team grilled us closely,
but we gained approval.

Rollout

We found enthusiasts within the business to lead on each topic area and
collaboratively devised a curation strategy to support their
involvement.

[]{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_87 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 87"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[]{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_88 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 88" role="doc-pagebreak"}To engage the whole company at
once, we hosted an interactive drop-in event, focused on encouraging
self-directed learning. Subject matter enthusiasts designed short
activities around their topics and everyone in the company was invited
to take part.

Impact and Engagement

> So, on what date do you think the behaviour change will happen?

What a question! 2nd August? 3rd September? There wasn't an answer.

However, such a question helps frame the challenges and possibilities
that this programme brings. A continuous learning culture will produce
new consultative behaviours, driven by acquiring knowledge and building
skillsets.

Michelle told us that there's more to impact than evaluations, so after
our launch, we monitored the analytics within the new platform to report
on behavioural data over individual reactions. What we saw was genuinely
curious!

We sent weekly emails focusing on a specific topic. We could see that
two-thirds of the business were logging into the system every week, and
one-third every day.

To sustain engagement, the Curiosity team brought in two members of the
Mar­keting team, who were leading on an internal campaign to continue
peer-to-peer learning.

Next, we plan to uncover where self-directed learning is happening
outside of the platform and gauge opinions on how people wish to see the
campaign continue.

Next Steps

We recognise that we are at the start of our journey and we trust our
colleagues to know the way forward.

Engaging with our Marketing team has brought new perspectives and we
have embedded this question into all training conversations: 'How will
you use curiosity to support you?' This leads to experimentation. For
example:

-   Recognising self-directed learning as a fundamental part of
    everyone's role.

-   Using the Curiosity platform to display curated content from subject
    matter experts (internal and external) and using the commenting
    functionality to drive conversation outside of formal training.

-   Reflecting on training and experiential learning by creating our own
    content, which can then be shared.

-   New starters using the platform to share their passion projects from
    previous roles.

Curiosity will continue to be at the heart of the L&D strategy. No
limits will be set on how our colleagues can interpret their curiosity.

**The Case Study Reflections**

*This case study of Virtual College's embracing of their learning
journey was a joy to behold, from their curious faces in a field in
Yorkshire on day one to seeing the internal
[]{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_89 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 89"
role="doc-pagebreak"}teams lead on peer-to-peer transformation.
Curiosity remains at the heart of Virtual College. Take time to consider
how the case study relates to your context. Here are my reflections for
your consideration, having thought of your own:*

-   *This was an organisation which was driven to stay relevant in a
    competitive market landscape, and they were prepared to put in the
    hours to make it work. Consultative L&D does not happen overnight.*

-   *Virtual College are on a continual journey of curiosity. Learning
    is never a one-time thing, or an injection of education. It is built
    up over time, scaffolding new learning on old, layering up
    experiences and reflections.*

-   *Failure is fine. It is learning and healing, although it is hard to
    go through.*

-   *Consultation needs thought -- the occasion on which Virtual
    College's own staff took a genuine consultative question to be spam
    shows the cultural work which needed to be achieved before the team
    themselves became consultative in their work.*

-   *Meta learning for L&Ders works -- being in the learning whilst
    experiencing the learning, and, in this case, writing the learning,
    are all useful ways to teach people.*

-   *The model Virtual College came up with for their team prepared them
    brilliantly, as they continue to win awards, now for more than their
    e-learning programmes.*

</aside>

<figure id="_06_CHAPTER_C04_UFigure_4_4" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF004.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_06_CHAPTER_C04_UFigure_4_9" class="figure"
aria-describedby="_06_CHAPTER_C04_UFigure_4_9_details">
<p><img src="content/images/M06UF001.png"
alt="The figure shows 4 clusters of factors." /></p>
<details id="_06_CHAPTER_C04_UFigure_4_9_details">
<summary>
Figure details
</summary>
<p>The factors are as follows:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Mindset: critical friend not a fixer, curious and questioning,
kind and supportive, be keen for excellence</p></li>
<li><p>Skillset: listening, challenging confidently, reflecting what you
hear, coaching skills, trusting your gut, academic coding</p></li>
<li><p>Toolset: Nigel Harrison’s Performance Consulting, Peter Block’s
Flawless Consulting, your organization’s values, a great set of
questions</p></li>
<li><p>Dataset: quantitative and qualitative data sets, recognition
primed data, stories, coding conversations</p></li>
</ul>
</details>
</figure>

<aside aria-label="Tip (4.2)" class="tip" id="_06_CHAPTER_C04_sec_004" role="complementary">

<figure id="_06_CHAPTER_C04_UFigure_4_5" class="figure">
<p><span id="06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_90" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 90" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF005.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_06_CHAPTER_C04_UTable_4_1" class="table">
<p><a href="#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_sec_005">Skip
table</a></p>
<div class="table" role="table" tabindex="0">
<table class="left">
<thead>
<tr>
<th scope="col"><p>Tweet</p></th>
<th scope="col"><p>Tips checklist</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><p>23-Jan-15 Become a consultative business partner. Ask colleague
what their pain point is &amp; help with learning solutions
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Business partnering</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>17-Feb-15 Move away from transactional L&amp;D. Ask why Bob needs
another sales course #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Ask why</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>24-Feb-15 Change the language: don’t talk training to your
organisation, talk about solving their challenges #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Solve problems</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>06-Mar-15 Encourage everyone to enjoy learning; make learning
every day and fun, measure less, laugh more, learn more
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Laugh more</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>20-Mar-15 Find out what learning goes on in the business outside
of L&amp;D dept and why. Be connected and meet business needs
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Look outside of L&amp;D</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>22-May-15 Start a consultative approach to L&amp;D in your org by
asking everyone what’s their pain? Then create solutions
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Seek to soothe pain</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>26-May-15 Continue moving towards more consultative L&amp;D by
asking staff about their needs rather than asking managers
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Consult with all staff</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>02-Jul-15 Learning is more engaging if it reflects current trends
&amp; interests. It’s tennis season: what can you connect?
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Be relevant</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>01-Sep-15 Harness the Back to School feeling by finding out what
colleagues want to learn with a consultative approach
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Campaign learning</strong></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
</figure>

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (4.3)" class="box" id="_06_CHAPTER_C04_sec_005" role="complementary">

<figure id="_06_CHAPTER_C04_UFigure_4_6" class="figure">
<p><span id="06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_91" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 91" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF006.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Are you naturally a fixer and a solutioneer?

-   How can you move to being a consultative critical friend?

-   Is your organisation ready for consultative L&D?Are you ready for
    consultative L&D?

-   What does challenge look like for you?

-   How are you maintaining your L&D excellence? What more could you do?

-   How comfortable are you with transparency?

-   Who owns career management in your organisation?

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (4.4)" class="box" id="_06_CHAPTER_C04_sec_006" role="complementary">

<figure id="_06_CHAPTER_C04_UFigure_4_7" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF007.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Stop jumping to immediate solutions.

-   Dig for data.

-   Correlate evidence from many sources.

-   Step back from your bias and experiences to evaluate the evidence.

-   Don't rule out recognition-primed decision making.

-   Draw up a list of killer questions to suit your context.

-   Consider consultancy models and come up with your approach.

-   Practice gently.

-   Observe results.

-   Build on your experiences.

</aside>

::: {#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_sec_007 .section .references .bibliography aria-label="THE LIBRARY LIST (4.6)" role="doc-bibliography"}
<figure id="_06_CHAPTER_C04_UFigure_4_8" class="figure">
<p><span id="06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_92" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 92" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF008.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Block, P (1981, 2000) *Flawless Consulting*, Pfeiffer, San Francisco
    (pdf)
    [[www.mcclo.files.wordpress.com/2011/12/peter-bloch-flawless-consulting.pdf]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.mcclo.files.wordpress.com/2011/12/peter-bloch-flawless-consulting.pdf)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/V2DY-UUTR]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/V2DY-UUTR))

-   Block, P (2011) Peter Block on Flawless Consulting, *YouTube*
    \[online\]
    [[www.youtube.com/watch?v=y3lhvdZJ55g]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y3lhvdZJ55g)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/432C-L86X]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/432C-L86X))

-   Carney, L (2020) *How to be a Change Super Hero*, Practical
    Inspiration Publishing, Tadley

-   Harrison, N (n.d.) Performance Consulting Model, *Performance
    Consultant UK* \[online\]
    [[www.performconsult.co.uk/what-is-performance-consulting/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.performconsult.co.uk/what-is-performance-consulting/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/9Z36-YB3T]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/9Z36-YB3T))

-   Jacobs, A (2018) Shopkeeper to Engineer, *Lostanddesperate.com*
    \[online\]
    [[www.lostanddesperate.com/2018/08/31/shopkeeper-to-engineer/]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.lostanddesperate.com/2018/08/31/shopkeeper-to-engineer/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/NTE6-EFAT]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/NTE6-EFAT))

-   Jarche, H (2014) The Seek, Sense and Share Framework, *Jarche.com*
    \[online\]
    [[www.jarche.com/2014/02/the-seek-sense-share-framework/]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.jarche.com/2014/02/the-seek-sense-share-framework/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/ECD7-QRAV]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/ECD7-QRAV))

-   Kline, N (2015) *Time to Think: Listening to Ignite the Human Mind*,
    Octopus Books, London

-   Kline, N (2020) The Ten Components \[blog\] *Time to Think*.
    [[www.timetothink.com/thinking-environment/the-ten-components/]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.timetothink.com/thinking-environment/the-ten-components/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/7U74-NPHM]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/7U74-NPHM))

-   Lancaster, A (2019) *Driving Performance Through Learning*, Kogan
    Page, London, pp 48--50

-   Learning Now TV (2018) Parry-Slater talks to Rob Briner about
    evidence-based learning, *learningnow.tv* \[online\]
    [[www.learningnow.tv/watch/programme-44\-\--28-june-2018/michelle-parry-slater-talks-to-rob-briner-about-evidence-based-learning.html]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.learningnow.tv/watch/programme-44---28-june-2018/michelle-parry-slater-talks-to-rob-briner-about-evidence-based-learning.html)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/8XAC-UKUM]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/8XAC-UKUM%0d%0a))

-   Neelen, M and Kirschner, P (2020) *Evidence Informed Learning
    Design*, Kogan Page, London, p1

-   Parry-Slater, M. (2014)What are your personal values, and are you
    living them at work? *Kairos Modern Learning* \[online\]
    [[www.kairosmodernlearning.co.uk/2014/11/04/what-are-your-personal-values-and-are-you-living-them-at-work/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.kairosmodernlearning.co.uk/2014/11/04/what-are-your-personal-values-and-are-you-living-them-at-work/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/X9GS-XMZR]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/X9GS-XMZR))

-   Wikipedia (n.d.) Gut instinct, or recognition primed decision
    making, *Wikipedia* \[online\]
    [[en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recognition_primed_decision]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recognition_primed_decision)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/R9FG-CFEN]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/R9FG-CFEN))
:::

::: {#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_sec_008 .section .endnotes aria-labelledby="_06_CHAPTER_C04_h1_008"}
# []{#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml_page_93 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 93" role="doc-pagebreak"}Notes {#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_h1_008 .title}

[1](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_Endnote_4_1_reference) For an
image of the Personal Knowledge Mastery process, see
[[www.jarche.com/pkm/]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.jarche.com/pkm/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/Y3N9-E5EV]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/Y3N9-E5EV)).
For more on the Seek, Sense, Share framework, see
[[www.jarche.com/2014/02/the-seek-sense-share-framework/]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.jarche.com/2014/02/the-seek-sense-share-framework/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/ECD7-QRAV]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/ECD7-QRAV))

[2](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_Endnote_4_2_reference) I
learnt about recognition-primed decision making from Jonny Gifford of
the research department at CIPD. I understand the model originates with
Gary Klein,
[[www.gary-klein.com/rpd]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.gary-klein.com/rpd)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/D86W-N35K]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/D86W-N35K))

[3](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_Endnote_4_3_reference) Andrew
Jacobs' blog,
[[www.lostanddesperate.com/2018/08/31/shopkeeper-to-engineer/]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.lostanddesperate.com/2018/08/31/shopkeeper-to-engineer/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/NTE6-EFAT]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/NTE6-EFAT))

[4](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_Endnote_4_4_reference) Will
Thalheimer is the founder of The Debunker Club. His podcast is useful;
[[www.truthinlearning.com/podcasts]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.truthinlearning.com/podcasts)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/9FQM-57WQ]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/9FQM-57WQ))

[5](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_Endnote_4_5_reference)
[[https://podcast.goodpractice.com]{.url-hyperlink}](https://podcast.goodpractice.com)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/CKX4-XUPV]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/CKX4-XUPV))
\@LnDConnect can be found at
[[www.twitter.com/LnDConnect]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.twitter.com/LnDConnect)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/HJ2Q-846C]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/HJ2Q-846C));
#LnDcowork can be found at
[[www.about.me/lndcowork]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.about.me/lndcowork)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/7YNA-DCQ8]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/7YNA-DCQ8))

[6](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_Endnote_4_6_reference) Eric
Berne's ego states explained:
[[www.ericberne.com/transactional-analysis/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.ericberne.com/transactional-analysis/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/6UQ4-TPA5]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/6UQ4-TPA5))

[7](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml__06_CHAPTER_C04_Endnote_4_7_reference) Take a
look on Harrison's website for an image and video of the Seven Step
model:
[[www.performconsult.co.uk/what-is-performance-consulting/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.performconsult.co.uk/what-is-performance-consulting/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/9Z36-YB3T]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/9Z36-YB3T))
:::

[]{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

<div>

[]{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml_page_94 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 94"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[[05]{.ordinal
.ordinal}](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_07_CHAPTER_C05_sec_001)

# [Data and Evaluation](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_07_CHAPTER_C05_sec_001) {#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml__07_CHAPTER_C05_h1_001 .title}

How to use data and evaluation for full effect to support a move to more
valued workplace learning

</div>

<figure id="_07_CHAPTER_C05_UFigure_5_1" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF001.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

Evaluation in L&D usually takes place after the learning. For years we
have pursued the completion of evaluation surveys, initially on paper,
but modern practitioners have moved to online options such as Survey
Monkey so we can email our 9/10 scores to the whole business as soon as
we get them, whilst sitting quietly on our 4/10 scoresheets, perhaps
citing that not enough people filled them in to make it valid. We push
our learning facilitators -- well, trainers -- to make sure they give
out the 'happy sheet' questionnaire as participants pack their bags for
home. We expect the participants to offer their feedback thoughtfully
and fairly, handing it back to the facilitator, who may have been great
or may have been terrible. But either way, it doesn't really matter, as
that participant's view is hugely subjective, especially as we didn't
ask them their reason for coming to the session up front, so we have no
real idea what they were hoping to get out of the learning in the first
place. Their cat may have died yesterday, yet here we are getting in the
way of their home time so they can tell us 'yes, everything was fine',
they are happy, they tick all the boxes. They hand in the paper, but
cannot actually look the facilitator in the eye because they feel a bit
bad as they mentioned she was a bit rushed. Oh, and the lunch was cold.
And they didn't get to eat their favourite biscuits. She seemed very
nice, the trainer person, but actually []{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml_page_95
.pagebreak aria-label="Page 95" role="doc-pagebreak"}I wasn't really
listening because all I could think about was Tiddles. Poor cat. I miss
her so much. And, well, that training room was a bit cold. Plus I missed
out on the custard creams. 6/10!

Evaluation is not about the biscuits! (Or, I should say, 'cookies' if
you are reading this in North America.) Nor is it about a subjective
score on a sheet of paper. Forgive my cynicism, but in my experience we
have been getting evaluation wrong in L&D for years, and it is time to
change. We are not helping ourselves seem credible or valuable to a
business. Whenever I have challenged a client to consider what
evaluation results they expect to see, many have struggled to articulate
what success would look like. On occasion, they have said 'we will worry
about that later'. No! If you cannot anticipate what successful outcomes
from learning investment will look, feel and behave like, then you
should not invest your time or money. As Stephen Covey told us many
years ago, 'begin with the end in mind' (Covey, 2020).

As L&D professionals, we need to consider evaluation much earlier in the
process. We tend to measure after the learning has happened, but that
means we miss so much richness of opportunity. It's not good enough to
prove real value of what the learning offered without a benchmark of
where people were before. Or without knowing how the learning has landed
months afterwards. Brinkerhoff describes this as like judging the
quality of a marriage by the wedding ceremony alone (Brinkerhoff, 2009).
To take the analogy further, with a wedding we all know there is the
planning, the invitation, the anticipation, the ceremony, the after
party, the honeymoon and the marriage itself. We need to start the
evaluation process at the very beginning -- from our first read of the
strategy, from our initial and ongoing stakeholder mapping, from our
earliest consultative conversation. That way we can build up a very
clear rationale for the learning, alongside the metrics we can use to
check the development we are trying to achieve. We marry data and
evaluation by taking the approach of asking what the evidence is
informing us of alongside what more evidence we need to seek to make
decisions. Data and evaluation are symbiotic. They are two sides of the
same coin.

To continue the story of Bob from [Chapter 4](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml), we
know that Bob needs learning support to close sales deals, as our
consultative approach confirmed the data that Bob only closes four deals
out of 10. To keep his job, he needs to close eight out of 10.
Therefore, we have a hard business measure for learning evaluation. It
doesn't matter to Bob how great the biscuits are or if the
trainer-tainment is rocking. It only matters that his knowledge
increases, his skills improve, and his ability and confidence to close
deals save him []{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml_page_96 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 96" role="doc-pagebreak"}from losing his job. So we
will know through long-term evaluation when Bob gets better at his job,
and we will be able to celebrate with him when he reaches his eight out
of 10 goal.

One half of our problem in respect of data and evaluation is how
meaningful the data is that we collect. The second half of the problem
is what we do with the data once we have it. We get our survey results
back and the facilitator gets a nice dopamine hit when they score nine
out of 10 for their virtual classroom session. That's very nice for
them, but how does it help anyone? What does it really mean? Does that
mean the learning has landed with the participants? Will behaviours
change in the workplace as a result of the learning? Or does it just
mean that particular live online class was enjoyable?

It's so important that L&D asks these questions of ourselves. We really
do need to get better at counting the stuff that really matters. Though
our businesses rarely cry out for learning data and we are not
encouraged to provide it, is this a reason not to provide it?

We need to evaluate meaningfully, as that will help us know what
additional data we need for next time. We need to have a good
understanding of what data we have, how and why we should use it, what
data we are missing, and how to collect quality data. We touched on this
in [Chapter 4](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml) when we talked about where to get
evidence and the fact that a lot of good evidence comes from having good
conversations and asking good questions. This is qualitative evidence,
and is a really rich source of data. We are likely also to need
quantitative evidence -- cost per head, return on investment, head count
-- depending on the numbers required by the language of your business.

If we move to using the data our businesses talk about, one source of
data we should definitely be using is KPIs (key performance indicators).
One of the challenges we have in L&D is that there is very rarely a KPI
listed against people development or performance. Consequently, when we
talk to stakeholders (see [Chapter 3](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml)), we are
already facing an uphill task when it comes to people development
because they aren't that interested. We can, however, look at their KPIs
and see how our work can help them to achieve them. That said, as part
of our better use of data and evaluation, I strongly suggest L&D
advocates for learning-linked KPIs in people development, especially for
line managers. It is a little ironic that 'Performance' exists within
the term, as improving performance, i.e. learning, is rarely within
scope of a non-L&Der's KPIs. Unfortunately, it is not often that
learning is given KPI status. To reach strategic goals which involve
people performing []{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml_page_97 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 97" role="doc-pagebreak"}at their best, I suggest that
needs to change, given the old adage 'what gets measured gets done'.

Data mining, data analysis, long-term evaluation over time -- all these
things may feel very alien to an L&Der. Typically, we are not used to
working with numbers, maths, percentages. We favour creative problem
solving and supporting people. Reframe your approach to data by starting
to think differently. Don't be scared of it; it helps us solve problems
and support people. We can solve problems with more guaranteed success
if we have the data behind us. If we evaluate the things that matter, we
will be able to help more people. We will know what they are in need of
if we 'start with the end in mind'.

<figure id="_07_CHAPTER_C05_UFigure_5_2" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF002.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

[Data
definitions](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_07_CHAPTER_C05_h3_001)

It's easy to get confused when thinking about data, evaluation,
measures, metrics and KPIs, and similar words in regular business use.
These words can be tricky if we are not used to thinking in a data
driven way. There are many good sources of definitions (including Andy
Lancaster's in *Driving Performance Through Learning*, 2019), but I have
provided my own here to ensure we are clear on what these words mean
through an L&D lens.

Analytics

The collection and interpretation of raw data to draw conclusions about
the information in order to improve decision making, decide on an
improved way forward, and consider next steps.

Big data

Large data sets (although the volume doesn't really matter) which can be
analysed to reveal patterns and trends to support strategic decision
making. This usually involves machines to compute the data.

Data (datum)

Individual points of information or values that can be quantitative or
qualitative. Examples are financial reports, HR people data, LMS
information, sales figures, machine outputs, inventory, etc.

[]{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml_page_98 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 98"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Evaluation

Making a nuanced assessment, usually via numbers, values, evidence or
opinions, to determine the success of something. In a broader sense, to
evaluate something means considering evidence to form an idea, to build
a hypothesis, to apply context to your data, to determine meaning from
the data you have measured. (A far cry from having only a happy sheet at
the end of a learning event.)

Hypothesis

Creating a proposed explanation, or a best guess, made off the back of
some limited evidence (which may be recognition-primed evidence, i.e. a
hunch) as a starting point for further investigation. Use a hypothesis
only as a starting point. Never run a learning programme off a hunch,
but investigate further, gather data and evidence to prove, develop,
alter, or disprove your hunch.

Key Performance Indicators (KPIs)

KPIs are a measure of progress against strategic goals. These are what
organisations consider to be key in terms of performance outcome. They
are organisational goals translated into practice.

Measure / Measurement

A measure is something that you can count, such as a number or volume,
e.g. e-learning completions, sales figures, staff turnover or new hires
within a set period of time. Measures are often based on systems
outputs, like number of widgets you produce or the number of customers
you serve. Things which are quantifiable are measures. Measurement is
the act of collecting and recording this data, actively in person or
passively via automation. One measure alone is never enough data.

Metrics

Metrics refers to a number of single measures pooled together to give
meaningful, correlated insights which are a stronger, more holistic way
of looking at data. For example, staff turnover correlated against
training, or staff turnover correlated against absence or sickness.
Metrics are really important for surfacing stories emerging from
measurable data.

[]{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml_page_99 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 99"
role="doc-pagebreak"}ROI & ROE

ROI is return on investment and a typical hard measure for learning. ROE
means return on experience or expectation in respect of
stakeholders[]{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml__07_CHAPTER_C05_Endnote_5_1_reference
.anchor}^[1](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml__07_CHAPTER_C05_Endnote_5_1)^ and is
a less typical, soft measure, yet it is very valuable to L&D as it
considers the intangible.

[Evaluation
models](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_07_CHAPTER_C05_h3_002)

Rather than recreate in detail evaluation models that have been written
about several times before, this book will offer a framework through
which to approach evaluation and data exploration. I suggest as a
baseline you at least consider the following four
models[]{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml__07_CHAPTER_C05_Endnote_5_2_reference
.anchor}^[2](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml__07_CHAPTER_C05_Endnote_5_2)^;

-   Thalheimer's Learning-Transfer Evaluation Method (L-TEM)

-   Brinkerhoff's Success Case Method

-   Phillips' 6 Stage Model

-   Kirkpatrick's Four Levels of Training Evaluation Method (after
    Katzell)

Although these examples encourage longevity and broader thinking, they
are regularly misunderstood and used poorly. Kirkpatrick's Level 1 --
the familiar happy sheet -- is often where people stop. Each of the
models has merits and flaws, and I encourage you to study these -- and
others -- and come up with your own conclusions or hybrid model to suit
your needs.

When developing your own methods for evaluating effectively, make sure
to start thinking about evaluation early on in a process and don't stop
thinking about it for some months after any learning activity has taken
place. This is where I see L&Ders getting evaluation all wrong. Our
timeframes are too short. Compare the formal education of children: it
takes years, and along the way there is constant feedback and scaffolded
learning, which sees children building on what they have learnt before,
culminating in exams as young adults. We don't expect children to learn
in one hit, yet the hit of injection education via one quick learning
intervention is standard in workplace learning, even today. As Amy Brann
discusses in [Chapter 1](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml) of her excellent book
*Make Your Brain Work*, an adult brain's ability to take in new
information is challenged by the amount that is going on for them, in
life or simply in the learning (Brann, 2013). This reinforces the need
to push away from injection education towards more scaffolded, ongoing
learning approaches.

[]{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml_page_100 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 100"
role="doc-pagebreak"}When we consider data from evaluations, often we
are looking for and at the wrong things. We look at completion rates,
for example, when actually they tell us nothing. We are not using data
properly to find out what is working and what is not. Therefore, we do
not see trends around the embedding of sustained change.

Emma Weber and Paul Matthews have both written books on the influence
and advantages of what they call 'learning transfer' (others may
identify this as sustained change) (Weber, 2014; Matthews, 2018).
Evaluation executed over time enables learning transfer to be embedded
within workplace behaviours, impacting on culture and habits. Though it
may feel this is an impossible nirvana for workplace learning, their
books offer support in this. In respect of measuring whether learning
transfer has taken place, Matthews puts it quite simply: 'If we want to
evaluate transfer and behavioural change from training, we must evaluate
the managerial and performance system, not the training'. (Matthews,
2018). I agree whole heartedly that we so often measure the wrong
things, and often at the wrong times, which means the evaluation data we
do have is not as useful as it could be. We are guided by learning
methodologies into doing it wrong. Take, for example, the instructional
learning design model ADDIE (Analysis, Design, Development,
Implementation, Evaluation), which demonstrates typical old school
thinking for L&D, where evaluation comes at the end. Whilst often
portrayed as circular, I would suggest it should be EADDI, with
evaluation at the beginning to help formulate and direct learning. How
can you evaluate at the end of the process without having considered
what success would look like at the beginning? When we cross a road, we
take into consideration why we need to cross the road in the first place
and we know our end goal is to get to the other side. We assess the
risks, the speeding cars, the real need for the crossing and the
benefits once we get there. Only then can a decision be made on the path
to be taken. So to put the old joke to bed once and for all, why did the
chicken cross the road? To prove we need to evaluate before we start.

[How to start better
evaluation](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_07_CHAPTER_C05_h3_003)

My recommendation for better evaluation would be to start with what you
have and build from there. Perhaps that is the kind of data L&D has
traditionally collected, such as evaluation forms, who turned up to
learning, our LMS data, or likes or shares on our Enterprise Social
Network such as Yammer. Or perhaps you have business financial data,
sales data, or people []{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml_page_101 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 101" role="doc-pagebreak"}data. We all have data, and
even the traditional L&D data has some value. Start there and see what
you have got. The Good Practice Podcast 138 raises the challenge of how
deep we need to take an evidence-based
approach[]{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml__07_CHAPTER_C05_Endnote_5_3_reference
.anchor}^[3](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml__07_CHAPTER_C05_Endnote_5_3)^. Data
is useful, but does not need to be perfect. I have also heard from Tim
Dickinson, formerly at Watershed, who suggests starting somewhere with
data, as some data is better than no
data[]{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml__07_CHAPTER_C05_Endnote_5_4_reference
.anchor}^[4](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml__07_CHAPTER_C05_Endnote_5_4)^. To
evaluate meaningfully, we need to question the data we have and seek
more.

Now, consider what you need to add more value. Think of your strategy,
your stakeholders, your consultative conversations. Build a hypothesis
to support your direction and next steps. Most successful evaluation
approaches begin with the original
hypothesis[]{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml__07_CHAPTER_C05_Endnote_5_5_reference
.anchor}^[5](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml__07_CHAPTER_C05_Endnote_5_5)^. What
additional data do you need? Where will you look for better metrics? A
thousand likes on a video on a social feed has its place, but it has no
value on its own. Correlating that measure against performance score
improvements can start to build a picture. That might lead you to think
about how performance scores are rated. Are they objective or
subjective? How reliable is the data? Have behaviours really changed as
a result of a learning video? What else is in play? Understanding and
collecting the data you need will enable you to make better strategic
decisions alongside stakeholders. More data in and of itself isn't
necessarily useful. There is huge value in focusing in on what
additional data you need to surface useful deductions. We can collect,
analyse and consider meaningful data with an intention of doing
something meaningful with it. What does it tell us? When we start with
what we have, we can go in any direction during our investigations.
There are only 7-8 hours in a working day, so we need to be clear in our
hypothesis and ask better questions of our data to make the most
effective use of it.

[Ask better evaluation
questions](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_07_CHAPTER_C05_h3_004)

If you only have traditional learning datasets, ask yourself a couple of
really important questions: Are your evaluation questions the right
questions? What do you do with evaluation data anyway? If we go through
the process of gathering evaluation data, either short or longer term,
we have to make use of it. So much data is gathered and not acted upon,
and, worse still, some organisations '...do not conduct any systematic
evaluation of the majority of their L&D initiatives (30%)' (CIPD, 2020).

If you are still in a transactional space, then it is most likely that
you are counting bums on seats, number of training days, training spend,
how much e-learning is completed, how good the lunch was, how good the
trainer was, []{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml_page_102 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 102" role="doc-pagebreak"}how many people liked the
biscuits. This doesn't confirm what someone will do differently as a
result of the learning. If we ask better questions, we get better
evaluation data. My advice on this is threefold:

-   *Keep them short* -- nobody likes pages and pages in a survey. I
    like asking participants to tell me WWW, EBI & WIN -- What went
    well? Even better if... and What is next for them?

-   *Keep them the same* -- that way you can make direct data
    comparisons, which is especially useful over time for looking at
    trends, particularly if you ask the same questions immediately
    post-learning, then a few weeks later and a few months later.
    Longitudinal learning studies in business provide banks of datasets
    for change over time. The Towards Maturity benchmark reports are a
    fine example of this.

-   *Keep them relevant* -- don't muddy the waters. For example, if you
    deliver by webinar, be sure to ask about the learning and platform.
    If you don't, people who are disgruntled or who love the delivery
    methodology will be sure to tell you anyway, and so you don't get to
    the heart of your evaluation of learning. Asking a learning question
    and a platform question will give people the chance to answer
    separately. Similarly, if you have to ask house­keeping questions
    about the room, the lunch, or the joining instructions, make sure
    they are separated out. In L&D, we need learning data and it's vital
    you take every opportunity to get it.

Writing great survey questions is a big responsibility. It is worth
spending quality time on coming up with and testing any new evaluation
questions and approaches. You may wish to seek professional advice to
ensure you have the questions you really need. It's also important to
bear in mind that you are unlikely to get a 100 per cent response rate;
indeed, it will be more likely lower than 30 per cent, and respondents
are often very happy or very annoyed, which will impact on the
reliability of your data. This makes creating questions that will get
you the data you need even more important.

[Seek out meaningful
data](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_07_CHAPTER_C05_h3_005)

The next step is to consider what else you need beyond better
evaluations to generate more useful data, and how you will achieve this.
We need accurate and useful data, gained through meaningful evaluation
and from many other sources. It is likely that specific learning data
will not play the most valuable role in this. Remember, as Paul Matthews
suggests, to evaluate learning we need to measure performance, not
learning. So often, L&D gets stuck evaluating learning as a function,
rather than evaluating performance []{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml_page_103
.pagebreak aria-label="Page 103" role="doc-pagebreak"}outcomes. Can you
get performance data? Do you have access to other people data that you
can correlate against performance data, such as longevity of service,
appraisal scores, career pathways or promotions? Do you have access to
other correlating data that impacts performance, such as customer
feedback, colleague feedback and productivity data?

Your consultative conversations with stakeholders will no doubt have
generated lots of data leads. Follow the leads and investigate them.
Start to build a picture of your organisation through the data. What is
it showing you? Consider the stakeholder comment 'nobody ever looks at
the LMS' and seek out data to prove or disprove that statement.
Correlate the conversations with data you already have, and find more
that you haven't got. Be open minded and unbiased.

Consider what other data is available in your organisation and how you
might use it. We literally cannot step anywhere without adding to our
data footprint, usually without even thinking about it. At work, we
create a huge amount of data -- swiping into the building, email
traffic, accessing learning platforms -- but what happens to it all?
Data has become as central to L&D as it is to all parts of a business.
However, we are not very good at actually making use of the data we
have, or seek to have, at least, not always in a meaningful way. For
example, you cannot seek out employees' blood pressure results, unless
you work in a hospital, maybe, and need them for medical reasons.
However, you could perhaps run a voluntary blood pressure testing day to
gather data as part of a wellbeing initiative, especially if you work in
a highly stressed environment. Different data points may have value
depending on your organisation, your hypothesis, and strategic aims.

The gathering of good evidence needs to become more agile, and that
evidence needs to be more quickly processed. Taking on board a vast
amount of data and processing it quickly, largely through AI, is
becoming the norm. There has never been a greater need for L&D to
embrace digital learning, and processing vast data lakes is a key
offering from a digital learning environment. Consider how your IT
department can support you in gathering and processing the data that can
help you. Be aware you may need to make a specific case in order to get
access to some data due to data protection laws, which protect data
gathering without just cause.

[Showing value in
data](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_07_CHAPTER_C05_h3_006)

You now have facts and figures at your fingertips. It is very hard for
detractors to argue with the evidence if you can articulate the trends
that data is []{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml_page_104 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 104" role="doc-pagebreak"}showing you. It's hard for
people to claim that L&D doesn't bring value if we have data stories
that show loud and clear that we do. That's why this chapter is about
data *and* evaluation because our job is not just to gather numbers and
information -- we also need to evaluate the evidence to make sense of it
and turn it into something meaningful.

Qualitative data which articulates the less tangible elements of value
-- people feeling more enthused for their role, people bitten by the
learning bug, people feeling loyal because their company invested in
them -- is potentially priceless. This information is the reason that
businesses work; people are motivated to perform better and stay in jobs
they would otherwise leave. If all we collect is the hard numbers (the
quantitative data) and not the stories that give context, we risk
missing the ability to share the true value of learning. Reflecting on
the original purpose for learning, as identified in your strategy, on
stakeholder consultative conversations, and testing using your
data-driven hypotheses culminates in being able to show impact. Offering
single units of information, for example, number of learning hours per
head, totally lacks credibility in comparison.

In learning, we sell value. In commercial learning organisations, we
receive hard currency for that sale. As internal L&Ders, our learners
give their time as currency. Either way, our learners want to ensure
good value for their 'spend'. We need good data to make the best
decisions to create content that is valuable. If learning participants
give you five out of five for your learning programmes, what does that
even mean? What does five out of five equate to? It depends on what you
are trying to make and why. If you spend £20,000 and the impact on the
business is a return of £1 million in new sales, then it is celebration
time. If a learner then left for a new job because they were so inspired
by their learning, that's also a value win to L&D and that person, but
perhaps not to the organisation. We need the additional data showing us
why and the stories around the numbers to make sense of the data. On
paper, what looks like poor ROI may indeed make for fantastic ROE. We
shouldn't just think in monetary terms about return when thinking about
value. It's not just about money -- it's about genuine value and how
your L&D department is adding that value.

Some argue that in business everything has a price, even ROE. There is
some truth in that -- a disengaged workforce can pull a company into
failure. Consider the case study in [Chapter 3](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml).
In L&D, we may need to understand what constitutes value and what price
tag can be attached to that. Businesses will invest in people if it pays
to do so, if it brings about an uplift in the business financially, and
if it empowers people. The feel-good factor is
[]{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml_page_105 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 105"
role="doc-pagebreak"}potentially part of this financial story. I agree
with the likes of Perry Timms, who advocates for the financial piece to
be given a smaller voice and the human experience voice to be amplified
because that is what gives energy to the workplace (Timms, 2020).

[Value chains](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_07_CHAPTER_C05_h3_007)

A value chain is a set of activities that produce a product that people
attribute value to. First described in 1985 by Michael Porter, he likely
wasn't talking about strategy from a learning perspective in terms of
stakeholders, consultative L&D, and data for evaluation. Nonetheless,
the premise works in that the product, or learning solution, is valuable
and there is a process involved in getting that product from conception
to delivery.

As discussed, the framework suggested in this book pieces together to
produce value, from strategy to stakeholders, from good questions to
hard data. Each forms a piece of the chain moving L&D towards creating
value, making value, and demonstrating value. Whether L&D is an internal
support function across the whole business, or a commercial partner for
other business, we exist to serve the rest of the organisation and make
it successful through the work that we do. Our job is to enable people
to do their jobs well, which is why we are in service to the whole
organisation and need to have a very clear value chain from one end of
the business to the other. We need to support the relationships between
different departments, connecting people, supporting people, and
offering value at every interaction. This is a long way from being the
traditional course provider in days gone by. This is deeper-rooted value
on a more fundamental, systemic level.

Data enables us to operate at this more fundamental, impactful, valuable
level because it allows us to see beyond the edges of one measure or
intervention. We can evaluate using both quantitative and qualitative
data, enabling us to get the stories out and to make more impactful
decisions about what learning we need to be doing. With the more
traditional analysis of learning needs, evidence is superficially
gathered. We might look at performance reviews, consider what we haven't
trained on for a while, or spot a gap in compliance. If you simply ask
people what learning they need, this instantly sets their mind down one
track, learning/training, not actually what their issues are. Data helps
us see a more balanced view and avoid the fake news.

[]{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml_page_106 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 106"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[Presenting the stories from
data](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_07_CHAPTER_C05_h3_008)

Once we can see our value stories, we need to share them. How do we do
that when often our colleagues are disinterested in data? The day job
gets in the way for many people at work.

Presenting data in an engaging, expressive and useful way can be tricky
if you have not done it before. You may perceive that you need to be a
whizz at spreadsheets, or graphs and charts. You could perhaps upskill
yourself in these ways for the numerical data. However, for the
qualitative data, you can use academic coding. This method of recording
and presenting qualitative data works really well for L&D data.

To help share stories that emanate during conversations, you can record
specific instances of the use of language. You may wish to go with a
simple positive or negative split, or you can drill down into more
detail. For example, if you interview 20 people and you say 'talk me
through your recent learning experience', the words they use in reply
can be logged per instance on the number of times those words are used.
You can turn this into hard numbers -- 16 said it was useful, 11 said it
was inspiring, four said it was dull. Or you can create a word cloud to
demonstrate the data in a visual way. I like using word clouds in these
situations because they can be shared as part of the learning solution
in a practical way, helping you to capture the stories and identify the
impact and value. You can also code language according to how strong the
response is -- is something good, or great, or really exciting. It is
easy for stakeholders to engage with data in such accessible formats as
it enables them to see value more clearly.

[Data analysis in
action](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_07_CHAPTER_C05_h3_009)

To illustrate the process I have outlined in this chapter, I want to
share a story I heard from an oil company at an L&D industry conference
about their use of data to identify need, and therefore to become much
more valuable in their organisation.

The IT department in the company were having a big problem with
employees around the globe opening phishing emails, and so they went to
L&D with a transactional request -- please provide a piece of e-learning
for the entire global organisation about not opening phishing emails.
L&D noted that the cost for every employee to go through that would be
high, both in time and money. The logistics alone would be immense.
Instead, L&D suggested that they look for evidence to see where the
problem actually []{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml_page_107 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 107" role="doc-pagebreak"}lay, offering the hypothesis
that it could not be every employee, rather it must be a subset of some
employees. But who? IT were tasked to gather data on who was opening the
phishing emails. The instant assumption, another hypo­thesis, was that it
was older workers who wouldn't understand what they were opening or the
risks of doing so.

To mine for data to prove (or disprove) their hypothesis, the IT
department, in conjunction with L&D, ran a fake phishing email. They
looked at who opened it and when. Importantly, they correlated that data
against HR data -- age, seniority, and how long people had been in the
business. This was key to the process, as it completely disproved their
assumption. It was not an age-related issue at all. What the metrics
showed was the threat lay in how long someone had been employed in the
company. Those who joined recently had learnt about phishing risks in
their induction. People who were in senior positions -- and this was
people of all ages -- didn't open the emails because they were closer to
business risk registers and generally more aware. The data was clear
that it was typically middle managers who had been there for a long time
who opened the phishing emails.

The result of the data mining and analysis meant L&D was able to target
a learning solution at a specific group of people at a much reduced cost
and with a much more personalised effect, with the result that the
problem significantly decreased.

This example shows that without a gentle way of saying no, and without
the data piece, L&D would not have got to the heart of the problem. At
best, they would have taken a scattergun approach, which would have been
costly and annoying for a lot of people. Perhaps one of the reasons
e-learning has a bad name is because it's often used in this way.
Targeted interventions will always have better ROI and ROE.

I really like this story from the oil company because it plays into my
favourite type of workplace learning -- meta learning. Imagine how wrong
this could have gone with a company-wide e-learning programme. By
trusting the process, by using the insight from data, the learning
solution the data unlocked was a learning journey for both the IT & L&D
departments involved. It really is not only the walk itself which is
important, but the insights unlocked on the walk that make a journey
worthwhile. My whole approach to L&D is not to focus on learning as a
destination, but to focus on why there is a need for learning in the
first place. We really need to do our homework before we begin so that
we are all but guaranteed successful learning solutions.

[]{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml_page_108 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 108"
role="doc-pagebreak"}With data, it is all part of our homework. Start
somewhere, find something, use something, and see what follows.
Data-driven decision making is always going to be better than guesswork.
If you are guessing now, stop and start walking alongside your data; you
will find it's everywhere you look.

<aside aria-label="Case-Study (5.1)" class="case-study" epub:type="case-study" id="_07_CHAPTER_C05_sec_002" role="complementary">

<figure id="_07_CHAPTER_C05_UFigure_5_3" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF003.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

The case study in this chapter is a celebration of a traditional
viewpoint shifting entirely towards a data-driven modern learning
approach. The story demonstrates that everyone is on a continuum of
development, and data can help speed up the transformation. Over to
Kirsty Lynch, Head of Group Talent & L&D, Reach plc, to tell their
story.

**DATA-INFORMED LEARNING**

**by Kirsty Lynch**

Reach plc is the largest commercial national and regional news publisher
in the UK, producing and distributing content through newspapers,
magazines and digital platforms. Our portfolio includes influential and
iconic brands such as the *Daily Mirror*, *Sunday Mirror*, *Sunday
People*, *Daily Express*, *Sunday Express*, *Daily Star*, *Daily Star
Sunday*, *Daily Record*, *Sunday Mail*, market-leading brands in key
metropolitan markets across the country, and paid-for celebrity brands
*OK!* and *New!*

We are not alone in terms of the challenges our industry faces with the
decline in circulation and the demand for up-to-the-minute news
available online. This shift has meant a significant change in terms of
skills required in our industry and has meant a huge change in our
organisation.

Our first challenge in L&D was the current model. This was, like many,
traditional classroom, face-to-face training. The L&D resource had been
significantly reduced, and we had a leaner workforce, meaning we could
not release the numbers to ensure there was a good ROI. This solution
was no longer sustainable. In addition to that, our employees were not
driving or taking ownership for their own performance and development.

[]{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml_page_109 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 109"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Our organisation now has data at the heart of
everything it does, and as a newly-formed L&D team I was keen we did the
same. It is important, I feel, as L&D we lead by example. Rather than
hiding away in a room for a few months creating solutions that we feel
are right for our business and employees, we had the novel idea of going
out and asking them what they would like to develop in their current
role. We created a simple survey and sent it out to all employees
encouraging them to take the time to 'allow us to help them'.

We knew we could no longer guarantee careers for life, and we wanted to
be transparent about that. We also knew from the feedback that our Gen Z
employees were not looking for us to provide a lifetime career. Our new
aim, which was aligned to that of our employees, was to 'create and
provide inclusive training & development opportunities to support our
people to be their best and prepared for the future with Reach or
externally'. Our vision was to also provide a 'one stop shop for all
development'. So, the journey began to see how we could establish this.
At the time, we were unable to report on the impact or even completion
of any of our training as we did not have sight of this across the
group. Due to the diverse nature of our business, we were uncovering
various solutions and providers and unable to collect clear data
centrally. The benefit of the 'one stop shop' was not only to provide an
enhanced user experience, but to allow us to measure the impact of our
new solutions and invest in the areas and functionality that our
employees were engaging with.

We had also recently launched a monthly pulse engagement survey. This
allowed us to check the impact of our new solutions on our growth
driver. For the first time ever, we could see almost instantly what was
working and what was not. We could also split the data by length of
service, age and gender function right down to team by team.

We launched our new blended approach in March 2018, and we changed our
name to 'Your Development Team', with the internal team strapline of 'We
provide the tools, you create the masterpiece'. We did not dare share
that with our editorial colleagues, as that would not have landed well.
We launched our offering of training which we brought together into one
central hub. In the 'Your Development Hub' all of our employees had
access to the following.

**Reach Corporate Induction:** Covering all the important bits -- our
history, our vision and values, health & safety, policy review and IT
training. The module aims to help employees settle in and get to know us
a little, whilst sharing important information on staying safe and
secure at work.

**Management Toolkit:** Based on feedback across the group, we created
the Management Toolkit, which focuses on giving people managers
confidence through developing their behavioural skillset to deal with
day-to-day situations. The toolkit []{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml_page_110
.pagebreak aria-label="Page 110" role="doc-pagebreak"}aims to inspire
debate and challenge current thinking around what it takes to be a great
people manager. The toolkit can be accessed via the Your Development hub
and includes classroom sessions as well as a range of self-directed
learning materials courtesy of Magpie.

**Magpie:** Magpie is a curator of bite-sized learning material from
across the web aimed at developing learners' soft skills. Using AI
technology, Magpie does the legwork by hand-picking learning resources
from across the web tailored to the role and individuals' interests. The
more you use it, the more refined it will become. For example, if you
prefer video content, Magpie will suggest more video content in future.

**Compliance Training:** Reach is a public limited company and we are
obliged to ensure we are compliant with all relevant legislation and
governance principles, out of fairness to our staff, stakeholders and
shareholders. It's incredibly important that we consistently meet these
standards, so we have set out some central policies which apply to
everyone. Compliance training completion is also considered during
probation reviews and Your Success end-of-year ratings.

**Apprenticeships:** We offer apprenticeships across multiple sectors
including:

-   Journalism

-   Business and Leadership

-   Marketing and PR

-   Media, Creative and Broadcasting

-   Technical, Engineering and Logistics

Once we launched, our growth driver steadily increased from 6.3 (out of
10) to 7.1, and our net promoter score in this area rose by 12 per cent
over the same timeframe. This allowed us to demonstrate for the first
time the ROI on our solutions in a much more robust way than we used to,
which was the old 'happy sheets' that people rushed to fill out at the
end of a session.

We also were able to tell when people were engaged with learning, what
time they accessed our curated learning content, and on what day they
were most engaged. We used this data to determine when to launch new
development opportunities or put out development comms. It worked. We
launched our new appraisal tool 'Your Success' in January 2019 and our
launch communication on our intranet site was the most-read article ever
to date (the average number of views per article was 300 in its
lifespan; our article was viewed over 2,000 times in the first two
weeks).

With a lean but strong team, our new offering allows us to focus and
invest our time in the prime talent of our organisation while servicing
and developing our []{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml_page_111 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 111" role="doc-pagebreak"}employee-led solutions. We
have data at the heart of everything we do now, and gone are the days of
happy sheets, as we can access clear data and adjust our offering
accordingly, ensuring we are making a difference to our employees, our
business, and always adding value.

**The Case Study Reflections**

*Reach taking a data-informed approach to learning reminds us we have to
step into areas which may be new for us. Take time to consider how the
case study relates to your context. Here are my reflections for your
consideration, having thought of your own:*

-   *Like many of the case studies in this book, there was a 'burning
    platform' for change. In Reach's case, it was the switch from print
    media to digital media alongside the switch from classroom to
    digital learning. If this is the direction of travel for the L&D
    industry, why wait for your burning platform?*

-   *The wider business had data at its heart, and it took a
    newly-formed team to see the need for that shift. Perhaps we should
    try to look at things with fresh eyes even without a change in
    personnel.*

-   *Kirsty started with a simple survey. Data mining does not need to
    be complex. Start where you can with what you have.*

-   *Kirsty had a clear vision for L&D, yet due to the lack of data and
    evaluation she didn't have clarity on what learning was taking place
    until they shifted approach. Seeking information, surveying
    regularly, and measuring impact all led to an enhanced user
    experience.*

-   *The case study reminds us of the need to correlate our data across
    a variety of metrics to get a truly rich vision of what works and
    what doesn't.*

-   *The ability to prove that the audience were engaged was more than
    simply satisfying for the L&D team; rather, it enabled better
    curation and understanding about when people were learning. Pushing
    content they want to see at a time when they are receptive to
    learning makes absolute sense.*

-   *The better use of time, enabling a smaller team to achieve more, is
    great testimony to the use of data-driven decisions, as it enables
    every learning offer to add value, as it is employee-led.*

</aside>

<figure id="_07_CHAPTER_C05_UFigure_5_4" class="figure">
<p><span id="07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml_page_112" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 112" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF004.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_07_CHAPTER_C05_UFigure_5_9" class="figure"
aria-describedby="_07_CHAPTER_C05_UFigure_5_9_details">
<p><img src="content/images/M07UF001.png"
alt="The figure shows 4 clusters of factors." /></p>
<details id="_07_CHAPTER_C05_UFigure_5_9_details">
<summary>
Figure details
</summary>
<p>The factors are as follows:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Mindset: curiosity, seeking, investigatory, confidence in our L
and D value, start with the end in mind</p></li>
<li><p>Skillset: numeracy, storytelling, knowing how to start with the
end in mind, understanding our context, data analytics, program
evaluation</p></li>
<li><p>Toolset: academic coding, evaluation models such as Kirkpatrick,
Phillips, Brinkerhoff, L dash T E M</p></li>
<li><p>Dataset: R O I, R O E, learning evaluation, K P I s, survey
results, stories</p></li>
</ul>
</details>
</figure>

<aside aria-label="Tip (5.2)" class="tip" id="_07_CHAPTER_C05_sec_004" role="complementary">

<figure id="_07_CHAPTER_C05_UFigure_5_5" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF005.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_07_CHAPTER_C05_UTable_5_1" class="table">
<p><a href="#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml__07_CHAPTER_C05_sec_005">Skip
table</a></p>
<div class="table" role="table" tabindex="0">
<table class="left">
<thead>
<tr>
<th scope="col"><p>Tweet</p></th>
<th scope="col"><p>Tips checklist</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><p>20-Apr-15 To support new L&amp;D thinking read @TowardsMaturity’s
latest report on evolving L&amp;D #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Read Emerald Work’s health check &amp; research
reports</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>11-Sep-15 Love this advice @blakehenegan Today’s #NoPlasters
tweet will be later than usual due to #Kairos reflection time</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Take time for reflection</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>19-Oct-15 “Most of my learning is on my own” says @LightbulbJo in
the recent #LSGWebinar Embrace this for your learners
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Be a self-directed learner</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><span id="07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml_page_113" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 113" role="doc-pagebreak"></span>02-Nov-15 What do
happy sheets really tell you? Learning is more than good biscuits and a
day out of the office #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Be better than happy sheets</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>03-Nov-15 If we don’t simply count happy sheets, what should we
count? Try impact on productivity, engagement, &amp; people
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Count impact and show value</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>18-Nov-15 Evidence will help you gain support for change. If
lacking internal data try external e.g. @TowardsMaturity
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Use internal and external evidence</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>19-Nov-15 Gather evidence for change from outside your org via
your personal learning network. Share success stories
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Gather success stories</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>26-Nov-15 Forget ROI unless you are measuring the right things,
just counting doesn’t count #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Count the right things</strong></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
</figure>

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (5.3)" class="box" id="_07_CHAPTER_C05_sec_005" role="complementary">

<figure id="_07_CHAPTER_C05_UFigure_5_6" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF006.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Are you guessing at what your organisation needs in learning? Do you
    have data to support your guesses?

-   Do you know whether the learning you provide is really what people
    need?

-   Can you prove that L&D adds value to your business?

-   What are you counting in L&D? Does it match what your organisation
    counts in business?

-   How deeply are you correlating your counting?

-   What value do your managers place on the learning investment, both
    in terms of time and money?

-   Do they value the learning enough to give their team time to learn
    without hindrance?

-   []{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml_page_114 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 114"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}Do they value the learning enough to ask their
    team about it before and after the learning?

-   Do they value learning enough to help embed behaviour change?

-   Do they value the learning enough to pay for it out of their own
    budget?

-   How about the person learning? Are they invested in it in terms of
    time, effort, thinking, or even money?

-   Do they value the learning enough to pay for it out of their own
    pocket?

-   Or to take time out of their busy schedules?

-   What about the senior team in the organisation? Are you fulfilling
    company strategy? Are they happy that the learning on offer is
    valuable?

-   If the answer is no to any of these questions, then should any
    learning happen at all?

-   Will L&D ever be able to demonstrate true value, no matter the cost,
    without stakeholders understanding the value potential before
    learning starts?

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (5.4)" class="box" id="_07_CHAPTER_C05_sec_006" role="complementary">

<figure id="_07_CHAPTER_C05_UFigure_5_7" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF007.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Seek out what data you have.

-   Correlate that L&D data with business analytics data.

-   Consider whether you are asking the right evaluation questions.

-   Seek more meaningful data.

-   Be curious about what is missing and why.

-   Consider a hypothesis and test it.

-   Analyse your data without bias and opinion.

-   Understand your value chain.

-   Present your findings in a way that makes sense to the audience.

-   Make data-driven decisions to increase the perception and value of
    L&D.

</aside>

::: {#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml__07_CHAPTER_C05_sec_007 .section .references .bibliography aria-label="THE LIBRARY LIST (5.6)" role="doc-bibliography"}
<figure id="_07_CHAPTER_C05_UFigure_5_8" class="figure">
<p><span id="07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml_page_115" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 115" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF008.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Beevers, K, Rea, A and Hayden, D (2019), *Learning and Development
    Practice in the Workplace*, Kogan Page, London, p298

-   Brann, A (2013) *Make Your Brain Work*, Kogan Page, London

-   Brinkerhoff, R (2009) *The Success Case Method*, Berrett-Koehler
    Publishers, Oakland

-   CIPD (2020) Learning & Skills At Work, *CIPD* \[online\]
    [[www.cipd.co.uk/Images/learning-skills-work-report-1_tcm18-79434.pdf]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.cipd.co.uk/Images/learning-skills-work-report-1_tcm18-79434.pdf)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/V47G-RCPF]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/V47G-RCPF))

-   Covey, S (2020) *The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People*, Simon &
    Schuster, New York

-   Lancaster, A (2019) *Driving Performance Through Learning*, Kogan
    Page, London, pp95-96

-   Matthews, P (2018) *Learning Transfer at Work*, 3 Face Publishing,
    Milton Keynes, p80

-   Mattox, J and Van Buren, M (2016) *Learning Analytics*, Kogan Page,
    London

-   Paine, N (2014) *The Learning Challenge*, Kogan Page, London

-   Phillips, J and Pulliam Phillips, P (2015) *Making Human Capital
    Analytics Work* McGraw-Hill, New York

-   Porter, M E (1985) *Competitive Advantage*, Free Press, New York

-   Thalheimer, W (2016) *Performance-focused Smile Sheets*, n.p.
    Work-Learning Press

-   Timms, P (2020) *The Energized Workplace*, Kogan Page, London

-   Weber, E (2014) *Turning Learning Into Action*, Kogan Page, London
:::

::: {#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml__07_CHAPTER_C05_sec_008 .section .endnotes aria-labelledby="_07_CHAPTER_C05_h1_008"}
# Notes {#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml__07_CHAPTER_C05_h1_008 .title}

[1](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml__07_CHAPTER_C05_Endnote_5_1_reference)
Beevers, K, Rea, A & Hayden, D (2019), *Learning and Development
Practice in the Workplace*, Kogan Page, London p298 uses expectations
for ROE. Other sources cite ROE experience. Either work in most
contexts, but be clear which is understood in your organisation.

[2](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml__07_CHAPTER_C05_Endnote_5_2_reference) The
learning evaluation models listed here (and more) are available via this
series of web articles and weblinks from learning data and evaluation
experts Watershed:
[[www.watershedlrs.com/blog/learning-evaluation/what-is-learning-evaluation/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.watershedlrs.com/blog/learning-evaluation/what-is-learning-evaluation/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/S6AA-K66N]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/S6AA-K66N))
or are listed in this chapter's Library List.

[]{#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml_page_116 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 116"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[3](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml__07_CHAPTER_C05_Endnote_5_3_reference)
Simon Heath, Ross Garner and Owen Ferguson 'Is it time we stopped
discussing innovation?' podcast 138, 22 March 2019,
[[emeraldworks.com/resources/podcast/138-is-it-time-we-stopped-discussing-innovation]{.url-hyperlink}](https://emeraldworks.com/resources/podcast/138-is-it-time-we-stopped-discussing-innovation)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/7KSR-QWPL]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/7KSR-QWPL))

[4](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml__07_CHAPTER_C05_Endnote_5_4_reference)
Conversations with Tim Dickinson whilst collaborating on the CIPD
webinar programme Data & Metrics for L&D,
[[shop.cipd.co.uk/online-courses/using-data-and-metrics-in-l-d]{.url-hyperlink}](http://shop.cipd.co.uk/online-courses/using-data-and-metrics-in-l-d)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/9YDW-2ABE]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/9YDW-2ABE))

[5](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml__07_CHAPTER_C05_Endnote_5_5_reference)
Evaluation and hypothesis trains of thought were honed in conversation
with Phil Willcox of Emotion At Work.
:::

[]{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

<div>

[]{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_117 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 117"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[[06]{.ordinal
.ordinal}](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_08_CHAPTER_C06_sec_001)

# [Social Learning](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_08_CHAPTER_C06_sec_001) {#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml__08_CHAPTER_C06_h1_001 .title}

Making the most of people learning from people

</div>

<figure id="_08_CHAPTER_C06_UFigure_6_1" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF001.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

Something that I hear all the time from people is 'I don't do social
learning because we don't have social media in our organisation.' This
is a mistake that people make time and time again -- confusing social
learning with social media. They are not the same thing. You can do
social learning without being on social media and you can be on social
media without learning.

So what is social learning? In essence, social learning is simply people
learning from people. It is the glue that sticks us together and the oil
that eases our journey through life and work. We've always done it.
What's more we all do it, all the time. Whether it's chatting to someone
on the bus, reading or writing books and blogs, or meeting to reflect on
a work issue, we tell each other stories, teach each other things, swap
tips and experiences, or simply pass the time exchanging snippets of
information. The inspiration for a new idea can come from anyone,
anytime, about anything. A lot of the time, we aren't even aware we are
learning because we don't necessarily tend to think of these activities
as learning.

Social learning really is not a new thing. Far from it. We have
literally been engaging in social learning since the Stone Age, when I
imagine we used to share stories around the campfire. Cave paintings
indicate how stories were shared; an example of social learning. The
learning might have been different back then -- no doubt, more about how
to hunt animals or the best place to pitch camp -- but it was still
learning; watching others and []{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_118
.pagebreak aria-label="Page 118" role="doc-pagebreak"}copying, improving
on techniques, exchanging tips, ideas and experiences. The invention of
the printing press enabled the comparable cave paintings of the day to
be translated into words and shared much more widely. The internet
equivalent, so to speak. All of it is social learning and it is
imprinted on the human psyche. As children we learn by watching and
imitating others -- parents at the dinner table, teachers in a
classroom, new steps at dance clubs. All of it is simply people learning
from people.

Of course, some social learning does happen digitally these days, though
much of it doesn't. The concept that social learning is social media
learning gets in the way of considering how we bring social learning
into the workplace. So, we need to stop the idea that social learning
happens just through online social channels if we are to have a
practical discussion about harnessing social learning at work. This is
not to say that we can't learn through technology, because we do that
too. We are fortunate to have a very wide, diverse range of ways we can
learn with others and from others -- movies, TV shows, YouTube, radio,
music, podcasts, classrooms, team-building, books, blogs, vlogs, clubs,
forums, articles... the list goes on. Some are online, some are not.
People learning from people: value as simple as that.

Yet I hear of businesses who lock down their internet and block YouTube,
prevent large-scale sharing on emails, and don't enable apps on company
phones.

There is great trust and respect needed for people learning from people.
Research from Julian Stodd (2018) offers trust in social technologies as
being higher than in formal learning. He also notes that there is a
difference between trust in technology and how trust flows through
technology. 'We trust "social" more strongly' (Stodd, 2018, p30). Thus,
if all L&D offers is formal learning, there is a whole piece of the
framework missing.

Therefore, L&D cannot continue to ignore social learning and what it
brings to organisations. We need to think about how we can facilitate
people learning from other people for the benefit of the work, and for
the support of the people in the workplace. Of course, it will already
be happening, even without anyone facilitating it and nurturing it
because people are learning from each other constantly. They don't wait
for a course when they need to know something -- they ask the person
sitting next to them, they seek information out for themselves, they ask
their personal learning network, their family, their friends, their
mentor, Google... We learn on the go unconsciously while having
conversations in the office, in the smokers' hut, in the canteen, on
Microsoft Teams chats. All of these ways of learning are worthwhile. And
without acknowledging them, L&D is missing their value.

[]{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_119 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 119"
role="doc-pagebreak"}There are several answers to why we should stick
our nosy beaks into social learning at work. Most importantly, I argue
that we need to amplify social learning to ensure fair and even
distribution to offer access for all. All things are not created equally
inside organisations. There are cliques, in-crowds, in-jokes, and shared
experiences that exclude, limit and divide. How can people access what
they need to know if they are new, or don't happen to sit near the right
people? Social learning should not exist just by happenchance. That is
not fair.

We need to amplify the social learning that is already going on, while
acknowledging that not all social learning is useful learning. Not all
conversations at the coffee machine are useful workplace learning. Nor
should they be. But what if they are never useful? What if there is no
socialised space for great work-based conversations? What if there is no
coffee machine or water cooler? What if people work alone, perhaps on
the road? What if people are lonely in a crowded workplace? L&D can
support facilitation of useful conversations, can bring the lone workers
into social spaces, and can offer sharing over lunches, with communities
of practice, with online forums, with newsletters. We can manufacture
purposeful conversations in purposeful spaces.

Another reason we should consider how we can support social learning is
because we need to challenge the view that unless someone goes on a
course for work, then L&D hasn't done its job. We need to help people
realise and accept that learning happens all the time in work. We, as
L&D professionals, are part of that, although not all of that,
particularly in respect of social learning. We can support social
learning by reminding people it is OK, it is part of the learning offer.
We should encourage or facilitate learning wherever it happens. We
certainly shouldn't be around just to pump out courses.

If social learning is happening anyway, should we get in the way? Why do
we need to wrap our L&D arms around it? Why does L&D need to get
involved in social learning in an organisation at all? Why don't we let
people merely get on with it? Ultimately, social learning, as Britz &
Tyer state, is about four things:

-   People not technology

-   Reducing friction

-   Conversations to create movement

-   Accepting you cannot control everything (Britz & Tyer, 2020)

[]{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_120 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 120"
role="doc-pagebreak"}As L&D professionals, we need to help social
learning flourish; it's important that the business understands we have
a role in that, but we do not wholly own it. And that is fine.

<figure id="_08_CHAPTER_C06_UFigure_6_2" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF002.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

[How to get started using social
learning](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_08_CHAPTER_C06_h3_001)

It is so important that we strengthen social learning in our
organisations, and by strengthen I mean celebrate, accelerate, enable,
and encourage. People learning from other people is fundamental to human
nature and it happens every day all over the world. In recognising this
reality, acknow­ledging that it's happening, trusting that it is useful,
and harnessing the power of social learning, L&D has the potential to
make use of something of value for the greater good which is utterly
natural to us. Julian Stodd, founder of Sea Salt Learning, explains in
*Exploring the World of Social Learning*:

> People learn through stories, at home, at work, when we meet strangers
> for the first time or when we get home to a partner. It's a way that
> we establish commonality, share ideas, advance knowledge and learn new
> things. Learning and development is largely a process of sharing
> specific stories with a population of learners. (Stodd, 2012, p8)

In sharing stories, there are all sorts of ways that we can help people
to learn socially. We can forge connections between people, we can help
people know which articles to read or podcasts to listen to, and we can
point people in the direction of good networks. L&D need to be
playmakers, rainmakers and changemakers. When we consider how many
present-day organisations started with social learning in coffee houses,
such as the UK Stock Exchange, Lloyds of London and the
RSA[]{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml__08_CHAPTER_C06_Endnote_6_1_reference
.anchor}^[1](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml__08_CHAPTER_C06_Endnote_6_1)^, it is
no surprise that we still see today social places where Albert Bandura's
Social Learning
Theory[]{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml__08_CHAPTER_C06_Endnote_6_2_reference
.anchor}^[2](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml__08_CHAPTER_C06_Endnote_6_2)^ plays
out; observing, collaborating, conversing. The theory suggest that
people learn from one another via observation, imitation and modelling
-- by any other name, copying, which is how all humans learn from birth.
We are primed for social learning!

[]{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_121 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 121"
role="doc-pagebreak"}In order to enhance social learning in your
organisation, you really have to think through the possibilities. Start
with considering what social learning looks like in your organisation
currently. Then, imagine what could it look like, and what it needs to
looks like to include everyone in terms of people sharing what they know
and receiving what they need. Are there pockets where a lot is
happening? Pockets where not enough is happening? What does it look like
in other organisations in your industry? Explore all the different
options open to you for the enhancement of people learning from people,
both physical options and online options -- webinars or books, live
online classrooms or real life classrooms, online forums or conferences,
blogs or magazine articles. You could put on a real or virtual campfire,
or a real or virtual networking event.

Think about what is useful for different groups of people in your
business. How do they learn from each other and behave in different
spaces? Think about how they would learn and behave in the spaces
suggested above. Ask people what they like about what do they do now,
what is useful, and what is missing. Tiny trials are a great way to test
and learn. Bring people together with purpose and observe. It is
important to have shared purpose, as it gives small talk something to
grip onto.

All these ideas are a start in harnessing the power of social learning
into a more wide-reaching offer for your L&D department. Our role is to
increase access, to put people together, and to ensure that for everyone
social learning is, well, social.

[Model good social
learning](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_08_CHAPTER_C06_h3_002)

Are you networked, connected, social, curious and a collector of
information? To get the most out of social learning opportunities, think
more broadly about what's useful for you, because it's important that we
model the behaviours that we're asking others to follow. Do you keep up
to date with learning industry events or journals? Do you read the
success stories of learning award winners? Do you connect with other L&D
professionals? Do you speak to different people from within your
company? Do you have your 'finger on the pulse'? Do you make time for
people?

What about your business sector? Being an L&Der, it's great to listen to
the Emerald Works Good Practice podcasts, for example, but if you
operate in the financial sector, then you need to be listening to
finance-related podcasts too. Why? Because it's important to be tuned in
to what's going on in areas of interest for your colleagues. It's also
important to know []{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_122 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 122" role="doc-pagebreak"}where others in your
organisation access good learning. As we will discuss later, you can
curate well if you know the good spaces to access information.

We need to make sure social learning is useful and accurate. Does the
person who sits next to someone in the office or the canteen actually
have the right answer? The answer could be 'yes', and it could also be
'no'. Peer-to-peer learning is brilliant, when it works. What we don't
want is people being given the wrong information by their peers. To
ensure that people get the right answers, a well-tagged online platform
of content could work well. Or a checklist of in-house experts may be
just the job aid that L&D could provide to help people build a network
of trusted advisors. We can also encourage networking and connecting.
For some people, the concept of a personal learning network is a new
one; we can help them with that, particularly by modelling it in action.

And for those who already have a personal learning network, we can help
invigorate or build it up, both internally and externally. We can also
encourage broadening and expanding networks, to ensure people think and
learn outside of their bubble and sphere of influence. This can be
particularly useful at key transition points, such as when a person is
promoted. You know they have great technical skills, but suddenly they
are in a management position for the first time and they could do with
having a solid network of people to call on about management, to bounce
ideas off and feel supported. They might need a whole new network, and
that's something L&D can facilitate, perhaps with a mentoring scheme. Or
consider a reverse mentor scheme skills exchange. We need to be highly
networked to be able to model this for others and to create spaces for
connections.

[Checklist of internal
experts](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_08_CHAPTER_C06_h3_003)

To foster good, effective social learning in your organisation, look
within your organisation. Draw up a checklist of internal experts.
Hopefully, you already know who those internal experts are -- we talked
about the importance of relationships with people in [Chapter
3](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml). If you've done that, then you know who the
good people are, who the willing sharers are, and the people who gain
kudos from sharing their knowledge. These are the people who make up
your checklist of internal experts.

When Abdul in Accounts wants to know how to use the holiday booking
system, you can put him in touch with Gloria in HR, because you've
already built a relationship with Gloria and have her on your checklist
as the go-to person for all things HR. You know that she is the person
Abdul needs to []{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_123 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 123" role="doc-pagebreak"}speak to. And further down
the line, when Gloria needs to do her expense processing, she knows
Abdul can help. Social learning is both the glue and the oil. It is a
little like an agency approach; you are an L&D skills matchmaker. Think
about times when you have been frustrated at work by not knowing what to
do or who can help you. Having a trusted list of advisers is a must for
even the most simple of organisations, let alone the most complex. There
is immense value in L&D being the ones to compile that list and showcase
internal talents. As Nikola Tesla alluded to, together we are wired into
one brain.[]{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml__08_CHAPTER_C06_Endnote_6_3_reference
.anchor}^[3](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml__08_CHAPTER_C06_Endnote_6_3)^ Be the
person to connect your whole company brain together.

[Lunch and
learn](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_08_CHAPTER_C06_h3_004)

Once a list is compiled, a way of getting people to share what they know
and to nurture social learning is to host lunch and learn sessions,
sometimes known as 'brown bag sessions' after the US paper lunch bags.
Put simply, people get together at lunchtime to discuss a topic. Often,
a topic expert will share first, and the conversation flows from there.
Lunch and learns are a great way of connecting people and knowledge.
They are really good for bringing together disparate groups of people
who might otherwise not mix and share. The concept of sharing food,
stories and learning plays into a very old and ordinary social
convention, which is comforting and informal. They are low-key,
low-pressure, low-cost events which don't take much effort as nobody
needs to organise slide presentations (unless they are keen to), as it's
just a group of people sitting around having food and a discussion.

This kind of informal interaction is popular with people, breaks down
barriers to social learning, gets people away from their desks, and
gives them the opportunity to connect and learn. The framework is light;
a subject matter expert introduces and leads a topic before opening the
discussion to the whole room (virtual or real) to make sense of what
they are hearing. L&D may need to do some preparatory work helping the
internal expert with facilitation skills -- how to manage noise in a
room, how to ask good facilitative questions, how to keep a
conversational thread going in the right direction, how to answer
questions appropriately, and so on. These are all good skills for people
to learn, and ensure lunch and learn sessions are vibrant, buzzy and
useful. The internal experts share their knowledge, experiences and
ideas and everyone takes away what they need.

[]{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_124 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 124"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Some people rail against lunch and learns, because
people need down time from their work and learning over lunchtime gets
in the way of a mind break, and potentially a physical break. I agree,
although this is entirely contextual. Learning Spanish at lunchtime, for
example, can be a workout for the mind, in the same way as going for a
run at lunchtime is equally as useful for freeing someone from thinking
about their actual work. If the topic is needed for the work, as opposed
to useful for continued professional development or just interest, then
the session should be scheduled during the working day, not at
lunchtime. Lunch and learn sessions are more about special interests or
showcasing sharing. You could also try outdoors lunch and learns, adding
a short walk into the mix too. These are fabulous gym-for-the-mind
opportunities.

[Managing tacit
knowledge](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_08_CHAPTER_C06_h3_005)

Knowledge management is the process of creating, sharing, using, and
managing the knowledge and information in an organisation. The reality
is that much of the information within an organisation is tacit
knowledge; 'the way we do things around here'. Tacit knowledge is the
glue and the oil within an organisation. It is often only ever shared
through social learning. It is what people don't realise they know
because it is so deep-seated. It is the stuff that newcomers find very
difficult to learn, because it isn't obvious. It is also the stuff that
can easily disappear when people leave an organisation.

Knowledge management and the mitigation of knowledge loss may not be
L&D's role in a business (although we have a vested interest), which is
fine provided someone is taking responsibility for it. Although it's not
really a common topic in business, I believe it is critically important,
particularly for welcoming new people in and getting them productive
quickly, and to avoid not realising what you have lost when someone
leaves. Tacit know­ledge sharing is too important to rely on the random
chance of social learning, yet so many organisations, even those with
great induction programmes, simply leave sharing and managing tacit
knowledge to chance.

Often people are completely unaware of the knowledge and skills their
colleagues and peers actually have. Indeed, colleagues themselves may
not know what tacit knowledge they bring to an organisation. We need to
make it as easy as possible for people to find any information they need
-- even that which is in the heads of their peers. To help people tap
into the knowledge in the building, you need to surface it.

[]{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_125 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 125"
role="doc-pagebreak"}To retain and share tacit knowledge, you firstly
you need to understand how knowledge is and can be shared across teams,
across departments and across geographies. What systems do you have?
What systems do you need? What knowledge do you have? What knowledge do
you need to retain or share? Knowledge management is key to how we
manage social learning in our organisations. Julian Stodd in *The Social
Leadership Handbook* (2016) and *Exploring the World of Social Learning*
(2012), has some really interesting things to say about knowledge,
particularly in connection to the 'grey space' of work and home
colliding (Stodd, 2012, p6). Stodd talks about the fact that we are now
in the social age, where knowledge is everywhere and that rather than
all the kudos coming from having and holding onto knowledge, as was
previously the case, the kudos now comes from how we extend our
knowledge to others. L&D can help those who hold knowledge to share it.
Ramping up kudos from knowledge sharing makes knowledge management and
social learning easier. People are social creatures, and if they are
motivated or rewarded by sharing what they know with others, this
benefits both them and the organisation.

Yet it's also important to consider Stodd's observation of how
accessible knowledge is now ever-present on our computers and via our
smartphones. Does this suggest that L&D don't need to manage knowledge
at all? Despite what learning is offered, formal or informal, managers
simply just look online, as suggested in The Good Practice report
*Google It: The secret online lives of UK managers* (Ferguson & Scott,
2016). If people are searching themselves for knowledge they need, does
L&D even need to harness tacit knowledge?

I believe we really do have a role to play here. There is so much
know­ledge in an organisation and, combined with the amount available
online, it is easy to be swamped and overwhelmed. Making tacit knowledge
ready to access, helping people know what is good to know, is immensely
valuable. A well curated set of resources can really support people
access what they need quickly.

Organisations, and people, are under immense pressure to be successful,
and being in business is incredibly challenging. An additional factor in
this is that the concept that a job for life is long gone: it's now a
common and accepted practice for people to change jobs every couple of
years, and even from one career to another. When they go, they take
their knowledge with them unless organisations mitigate that risk and
consider the implications of knowledge leaving the building. Losing
tacit knowledge can be costly for the business as a whole, but for us in
L&D specifically. Not being able to tap
[]{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_126 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 126"
role="doc-pagebreak"}into an internal network for L&D solutions means
buying externally, costing money, time and resources when we factor in
that knowledge will need synthesising to your organisation's needs.
Organisations cannot usually afford to lose knowledge and experience,
not least because it can take years to build up again. It's more
effective to use what you have from the start. To support and protect
tacit knowledge, any successful business needs L&D to be guardians,
developing effective curation skills, critical thinking skills, and
managing knowledge. We also need to be directly networking colleagues to
the right people, helping them to learn for themselves how to check out
credibility, how to widen their circle of influencers, and how to put
curiosity at the heart of their development.

[Curation](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_08_CHAPTER_C06_h3_006)

Good curation is a clear offer that L&D can make to the social learning
agenda within an organisation. Freely available, incredible content. Who
doesn't want that? The important thing is that people have to get to the
knowledge that they need to do their jobs. As L&D professionals, we can
help people navigate their way through all the knowledge that is
available, whether it's from internal or external experts. Like a great
museum curator, we can make sense of the options to cut to what's
relevant in shaping a story for people so they can access what they
need, specific to their organisation and their sector, when they need
it. Curation enables people to feel connected to the outside world, yet
the sensemaking offered by the curator helps them relate the content to
their work and company. We can help make links to our brand and mission.
We can offer content as a topic of discussion for a community of
practice.

This is L&D in action, really adding value to social learning. We can
curate a feed to ensure relevance. People simply haven't got time or the
patience to wade through 40 different YouTube videos or 70 different
articles to find the nugget of truth they need to do their job better.
They will give up, or only look at the first few on their feed, which
are often promoted adverts anyway. Don't leave people to sort through
the noise themselves, as they have day jobs and are therefore unlikely
to do it regularly.

Don't think that in curating we then need to wade through the hundreds
of pieces of content, either. There are many tools to help capture and
curate on the web -- [[Scoopt.it]{.url-hyperlink}](http://Scoopt.it),
Feedly, Twurly, Pinterest, Listly, Pocket, Wakelet, Evernote, Anders
Pink and more. If you sign up to your industry news digests, such as
LearningNews.com for the L&D industry, you don't need
[]{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_127 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 127"
role="doc-pagebreak"}to spend hours to support your colleagues. Be
conscious of the bias (news feeds are usually paid for), so do dip in
and out elsewhere. But it is a start and models behaviours others may
pick up on for themselves.

If you are overwhelmed by all this choice, start simply. Try Twitter
Lists. If you find someone whose name pops up a lot (an influencer),
follow them and review their lists. Not everyone uses Lists, but those
who do offer you the opportunity to copy their list to have a ready-made
timeline of people on a topic. You could also look at who they are
following and follow those too. Go wide and broad with your approach, or
you may fall into the trap of social bubbles. Again, modelling good
behaviours in social learning is important. Follow people who have
opposing views to yours, or work in entirely different fields than you.
You never know where good information and inspiration comes from.

[Communities of
practice](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_08_CHAPTER_C06_h3_007)

Social learning can be brought into formal learning through communities
of practice, an organised group of people regularly coming together in a
structured way for a specific reason -- to learn something new,
consolidate learning during an ongoing programme, move thinking onward,
or solve a challenge. Often, communities of practice come together to
solve a problem. Crucially, this gives the group a very clear focus.

As a concept, communities of practice date back to 1991 when the
cognitive anthropologist Jean Lave and the educational theorist Etienne
Wenger first mooted them in their book *Situated Learning*. Wenger went
on to develop the idea much further in his 1998 book *Communities of
Practice*. His definition of a community of practice is:

> ... a group of people who share a concern or a passion for something
> they do, and learn how to do it better as they interact regularly.
> This definition reflects the fundamentally social nature of human
> learning. It is very
> broad.[]{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml__08_CHAPTER_C06_Endnote_6_4_reference
> .anchor}^[4](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml__08_CHAPTER_C06_Endnote_6_4)^

Setting up a community of practice requires a clear sense of purpose and
the permission to do it (see [Chapter 10](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml) for
more on permission). As well as purpose, you need several things in
place in order for a community to be impactful: a regular time when you
meet, a designated meeting space, an agenda and a budget for coffee and
cake! Facilitation of the community, at least in the early days, is
important, as people don't necessarily have the skills to self-run a
useful learning time together. The group will need someone who can hold
the space, reflect what they are hearing, keep
[]{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_128 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 128"
role="doc-pagebreak"}people focused, and moderate within the group and
also out to the wider organisation.

Although the popularity of communities of practice decreased for a time,
they are increasingly coming back into play. This is in part due to the
ease of access of social apps which make organising, connecting, and
staying connected easier for participants. If you are a global or
dispersed organisation with sites across a country, it is easier to set
these up now than it has ever been. Technical tools such as Doodle Poll,
Calendly and Eventbrite organise people, and Google Meet, Zoom,
Microsoft Teams or Skype enable people to meet. L&D can use such social
tools to help communities of practice operate and thrive across
different geographies. This is a perfect example of what we've already
established: that social media as an entity isn't social learning;
rather, a tool that can enable social learning.

You may choose to facilitate your community online, perhaps through a
forum on your intranet or enterprise social network. In such a case,
managing your community is paramount. Don't assume that you will build
it and they will come. Even with a clear purpose, it can be really
difficult to initially engage as a participant in an online space, so a
community manager is hugely beneficial. Their role is to be welcoming,
encourage participation, make connections, and ensure all participants
get what they need. They also need to ensure participants are clear on
what the online space is for and how to act there. People all know the
social norms of offline, in-person spaces because of decades of
normalising behaviours. For online communities, spelling out the
behaviours helps people normalise the group. Sadly, the posting of
inappropriate comments in some online social communities is the reason
companies regularly refuse permission for online forum space. This valid
concern can overwhelm the benefits that online learning communities can
offer, so in any online learning space it is helpful to have agreed
guidelines to mitigate the risk. In addition, your community manager can
monitor and moderate the community (although in my experience, there is
rarely such a need in workplace online settings. If you treat people
like adults, they tend to respond positively.).

In addition, for formally-provided communities of practice, there are
usually informal communities in organisations that form serendipitously:
people who started in a company on the same day, the middle manager
groups, the running club, etc. These people come together with a common
connection and they learn from each other. No matter how shy or
introverted we are, such connectivity is human nature and is often how
we learn best. People learning from people.

[]{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_129 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 129"
role="doc-pagebreak"}*Cultivating Communities of Practice* (2002) by
Wenger *et al* is a good resource for understanding communities of
practice, also known as socialised learning communities (a more generic
term for communities of practice and less structured online
communities). In the preface, Wenger tells us that no book is ever the
creation of just the writer. Rather, he says, books, and similarly
learning experiences:

> ...find their origin in a vast web of relationships and conversations
> that include people we have worked with and who have directly
> influenced our thinking as well as people whose influence has been
> indirect, sometimes beyond our awareness. (pxii)

This excerpt sums up how I feel about socialised learning communities in
general. We can all learn from each other all the time. I also agree
with this sentence from Wenger *et al*: '*We express our gratitude and
our sense of belonging to a community in search of itself.'*

It is true that people are in search of themselves in organisations.
They want to know how they fit into their organisation, into their
department and their team, and into the overall culture. Community
exists because of people; culture exists because of people. L&D has a
large part to play in helping people exist within a community, within an
organisation, at least from a learning perspective. Though I'm not
exploring this in more detail as it applies more to organisational
development, it is worth investigating if you are curious about a more
holistic, broader view on the impact of development.

Think about what Wenger said about feeling grateful, about recognising
important relationships. Reflect on who has helped you in your career.
Who are you grateful to and why? Can you harness some of what they have
given you to pass on to others in your organisation? Could you set up a
community of practice to give purposeful sharing to others? Or an online
community? Can you give people a hand up? In my career, I am profoundly
grateful to my community, because I have learnt so much from other
people and they have helped me to move my practice on. It is actually
one of the reasons why I wanted to share my ideas in this book, to give
back to the L&D community.

We are better together -- that is what Wenger's book says to me. We are
social creatures, and one person on their own is not enough. Yet, that
conflicts with how we have approached learning in the latter part of the
last century. In corporate L&D and, to a large extent, in Western
education systems, we have taken away the community element of learning.
We have []{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_130 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 130" role="doc-pagebreak"}gone for a 'teach to the
test' technique over holistic, whole person learning. We have gone for
'click-next, quiz-at-the-end' e-learning, a digital learning journey
without social learning. And how was it for us? It wasn't good. It was
terrible, in fact, and people hated it. Yet, sadly, it is still a
reality for many learners, even today. Compliance training is rife with
bad e-learning experiences which teach nothing other than how to click
through the 'learning' at speed, covering the bare minimum. In these
situations, people learn nothing of any real value. Is it any wonder
people crave classroom training? What they are actually craving is the
socialised learning of a community.

Whilst we don't know the long-term impact the huge homeworking
experiment caused by Covid-19 will have, what we do know is that without
the social tools at our disposal we really would have struggled to
continue with our
work[]{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml__08_CHAPTER_C06_Endnote_6_5_reference
.anchor}^[5](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml__08_CHAPTER_C06_Endnote_6_5)^.
Overnight, we went from around 30 per cent of the UK's workforce working
from home at some point during the week to double that working from home
all the time, with three out of five people wanting to continue to do so
after lockdown
ends[]{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml__08_CHAPTER_C06_Endnote_6_6_reference
.anchor}^[6](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml__08_CHAPTER_C06_Endnote_6_6)^. What
we have all come to realise is that online social skills are largely
inherent already. Businesses moved successfully and smoothly from
offices to dining rooms, bedrooms and sheds overnight, because people
were already confident with tech skills or willing to give it a go. They
were already using family WhatsApp groups, Skyping with nephews and
nieces in Australia, and honing their digital savvy. People perhaps had
these skills and just needed a bit of honing to convert them into the
world of work. So, it will be interesting to see how and if people will
(and I am sure they will) make use of social digital tools more widely
to build on communities of practice in the future.

[Trust and
culture](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_08_CHAPTER_C06_h3_008)

Ultimately, social learning will only work if you have the trust and
culture of connection. Social learning needs trusted partnerships and a
culture of being social within work. People need to want to seek out
peer support and information; people need also to feel they can.

If an organisation launches an enterprise social network or a
collaborative culture without purpose, it will not work. You can make it
work by defining purpose, but if you don't also have a collaborative,
social culture, it will take some very strong community managers to
bring people together around that purpose.

Establishing trust is paramount to social learning. Julian Stodd in *The
Trust Guidebook* (2018) talks about the relationship of technology to
trust. []{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_131 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 131" role="doc-pagebreak"}His research suggests that
people trust formal technology less than social technology (p30). Stodd
goes on to talk about the instincts of trust in which he cites people
relying on gut instinct and eye contact. These physical manifestations
of trust are different in different cultures around the world; however,
it is apparent that people need to be 'seen' in some way to be trusted.
Seeing someone in physical and virtual social spaces is effective in
building operative and collaborative trust. Not enabling a digital
footprint leads to either a lack of trust, or more likely a situation
where the socialised conversations happen out of sight in exclusive,
social bubbles. In one example, Stodd states 'In one Organisation,
people described seventeen different technologies that they use to be
effective, but only one of those was owned by the Organisation'. (p39)

For me, this crystallises the fact that if you don't embrace social
learning, if you rely only on your classrooms and formal learning
management system, you are missing out on the trusted spaces where
people go for help. You are also not helping those with no place to go.
You are not harnessing all the expertise your company has. You are
impacting productivity, as people spend time finding their own way. And
most importantly, the organisation is not in on the chat. Organisations
that don't trust their staff are low energy and the poorer for it,
according to Perry Timms in *The Energized Workplace* (2020), where in
[Chapter 7](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml) he talks about misuses of energy.
Organisations that don't embrace social learning are like ostriches with
their head in the sand. It is therefore up to L&D not only to curate
knowledge, but the platforms and places where learning can benefit the
organisation and the people within it.

<aside aria-label="Case-Study (6.1)" class="case-study" epub:type="case-study" id="_08_CHAPTER_C06_sec_002" role="complementary">

<figure id="_08_CHAPTER_C06_UFigure_6_3" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF003.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

This case study is an amazing example of playing right into the heart of
all that is good about social learning. People like learning from each
other, they like recognising themselves in the learning, they like
something catchy. James Woodman, partner at Acteon, an award-winning
digital communication and learning agency based in Cambridge, tells the
story of how Acteon used techniques from the worlds of
[]{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_132 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 132"
role="doc-pagebreak"}advertising and communications to make anti-bribery
and corruption compliance learning effective, engaging and enjoyable
(now there is a sentence you don't hear very often in L&D!). The need
for all organisations to comply with legal learning requirements means
that learning cannot be left to a haphazard chance of social learning. A
targeted learning offer blending formal and informal is an appropriate
balance, and is a great way to put social learning into action. Acteon
supported Channel 4 to ensure that everyone was talking about compliance
learning.

**IS IT OK? COMPLIANCE TRAINING IN A HOSTILE ENVIRONMENT**

**by James Woodman**

Channel 4 has an enviable reputation. It has been at the forefront of
cutting-edge broadcasting in the UK since 1982, and is widely admired
for its commitment to representing diverse groups and championing
creativity.

Like all high-profile organisations, Channel 4's behaviour comes under
constant scrutiny. Every broadcaster knows the price of a lapse in
judgement.

Public trust is critical to the bottom line for Channel 4, because its
relationship with viewers directly affects advertising sales revenues.
Leaders expect colleagues to stick to the organisation's Code of
Conduct, which defines the attitudes and behaviours that underpin
Channel 4's reputation.

The Code focuses on critical areas of business risk, like personal
integrity, conflicts of interest, information security and gifts and
hospitality. It sets out the company's expectations, linking them to
policies and procedures that provide context and detail.

Channel 4 decided to use digital learning to teach people about the
Code, but there was a fundamental challenge: this is not a natural
environment for compliance training. The organisation defines itself as
'Born Risky'. Its people are cheeky, fearless and curious. They act with
heart. How do you promote the constraints of 'codes' and 'policies' in
an organisation that thrives on pushing boundaries and taking creative
risks?

Is it OK to be different?

To build engagement, Acteon took a completely new approach. We linked
the important -- but dull -- messages of compliance to those
aspirational goals of taking risks and pushing boundaries.

The key message throughout was that cutting-edge broadcasting is built
on a foundation of exemplary professional practice. That was reflected
in the name of the course -- *Learning to take risks*.

We wanted to build competence, not just compliance, and that meant
focusing less on knowledge and more on actions. There's too much detail
in the policies for most people to remember, so what do we actually want
them to do?

[]{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_133 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 133"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Instead of trying to teach specifics, we targeted
behaviour change by reinforcing the importance of one key action: to
build the habit of checking your conduct and asking 'Is it OK?'

Authenticity builds engagement and trust

Channel 4's distinctive culture and brand are highly valued by its
employees. To build engagement and trust, we had to capture and reflect
that throughout the learning content -- and we had to make sure people
felt that the learning was relevant.

As a starting point, we adopted a writing style that encapsulated
Channel 4's core values. We used bold images from well-known TV
programmes to build the link between the Code and Channel 4's broadcast
output. Where the learning featured audio narration, it was provided by
the familiar and popular voice of a Channel 4 continuity announcer.

Peer contributions were vital. *Learning to take risks* contains a wide
range of video content from colleagues in a range of roles -- everyone
from graduate interns to the Chief Executive.

Acteon worked with subject matter experts to create authentic scenarios
and to set them in the context of key messages from the Code. Formats
included video-based 'mini documentaries', quick-fire questions and
dynamic scrolling stories, each presenting a range of possible conduct
choices and posing the fundamental question: 'Is it OK?'

We kept coming back to the idea that we weren't expecting people to
memorise details. We wanted them to know that the policies exist, to be
aware of what they cover, and to know when they might need to look at
them or to seek advice.

Using technology effectively

Channel 4's workforce is young, creative and media-savvy. The content
had to meet their expectations.

We created a highly visual learning experience, with minimal text on
screen, a simple interface and contemporary touch-screen design styles.
The end result was an attractive and engaging blend of text, graphics,
audio and video with a wide range of learner interactions -- all built
in responsive HTML.

Behind the scenes, the Breeio LMS provides learning management, and the
system is integrated with the C4 intranet, giving seamless access to
learning with no additional login.

Breeio makes it easy for Channel 4 to generate precisely the management
information required. Dynamic reporting means that managers can 'cut'
usage and completion data in whatever ways they need to meet audit
requirements.

[]{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_134 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 134"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Campaigning for change -- and delivering results

The e-learning content was delivered as six modules, released at weekly
intervals and supported by a range of internal communications. The
result was a six-week campaign around appropriate conduct and its
importance to Channel 4's reputation.

We used digital display screens around the offices to show
attention-grabbing posters with striking images and provocative
headlines. These were backed up by the 'message of the day' displayed on
staff computers, and by all-staff e-mails sent by the Chief Executive at
key points during the campaign. We produced short, high-impact video
teasers for the intranet.

Crucially, the campaign did more than just tell people to do their
e-learning. It was part of the learning, designed to provoke thought and
discussion, and the result was an extended focus on conduct, right
across the business.

Putting the project centre stage in this way led to enthusiastic uptake.
*Learning to take risks* achieved its critical audit requirement of 90
per cent completion in just 11 weeks -- 24 weeks ahead of schedule.

The specific targets for the project were to demonstrate raised
awareness of the Code of Conduct, and to increase declarations of gifts,
hospitality and conflicts of interest. Data showed that learners quickly
put all this into practice.

The "Is it OK?" theme was one that resonated with our staff, and was an
innovative way to give ownership back to our people,' said Diane
Herbert, Director of Human Resources. 'The results have been tangible.
We have seen an increase in the number of declarations and questions
simply checking if a particular action is OK.'

Risky, not reckless

Channel 4 has always known that its success is founded on detailed
thought and planning. Creativity doesn't mean making it up as you go
along, and being 'Born Risky' doesn't mean being reckless. This project
was important because there was a clear business need.

*Learning to take risks* worked because the content and the strategy
embraced the culture and the brand of Channel 4. That foundation was
crucial, and it meant that our campaign for change got results. The
project needed alignment and adoption -- and it had both.

'Creative organisations like Channel 4 have always found it very hard to
get this kind of training right,' said David Abraham, who was Chief
Executive at the time this project launched. 'People can easily see the
material as patronising -- or irrelevant. But this course is different,
because it's been designed with risk-taking right at its heart, and
that's resulted in a great response from staff. Learning to take risks
helps us to be bold, brave and courageous -- whilst maintaining our
accountability and our reputation.'

[]{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_135 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 135"
role="doc-pagebreak"}**The Case Study Reflections**

*Acteon achieved for Channel 4 what many dream of -- making compliance
learning something to talk about in the corridors and at coffee
machines. Take time to consider how the case study relates to your
context. Here are my reflections for your consideration, having thought
of your own:*

-   *Authenticity was crucial to the success of this project. Acteon
    played right into the heart of the business issue -- ensuring
    competence, not just compliance -- by targeting behaviour change in
    ways people recognised.*

-   *The content was very on brand and linked to values. It looked like
    Channel 4, felt like Channel 4. By making the learning in TV show
    style, with an appropriate look and feel, they built engagement, and
    trust. People could identify with it. Nobody can identify with
    click-next, quiz-at-the-end e-learning.*

-   *The learning was social and felt social. Peer contributions were a
    fundamental element. People like to see colleagues in learning. The
    hashtag gave people something to get behind. It was taken from a
    real Channel 4 TV show,* The Last Leg, *and connected people to the
    reality of the learning.*

-   *The nature of the learning being so ingrained in the everyday with
    the hashtag, posters and on-screen straplines meant it was no more
    unusual to chat about it at work than it was to chat about a show
    seen the night before. Such societal norms, such social learning
    norms, made the content of this project normal too.*

-   *This was an e-learning project that utilised campaign learning.
    Campaigns work because we are already used to them from the world of
    marketing. The crossover of disciplines used in Acteon's approach to
    learning projects is one we can all learn from.*

-   *The multimedia approach was also part of the success -- it wasn't
    just the TV show-style e-learning, but the strapline hashtag, the
    striking imagery, the ads around the office, the message of the day
    on computers -- it all added up to an effective blended campaign to
    push the messaging.*

-   *The key here is that people talked about it. Willingly. When was
    the last time you walked through your office and heard people
    chatting about learning? Let alone compliance learning?*

</aside>

<figure id="_08_CHAPTER_C06_UFigure_6_4" class="figure">
<p><span id="08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_136" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 136" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF004.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_08_CHAPTER_C06_UFigure_6_9" class="figure"
aria-describedby="_08_CHAPTER_C06_UFigure_6_9_details">
<p><img src="content/images/M08UF001.png"
alt="The figure shows 4 clusters of factors." /></p>
<details id="_08_CHAPTER_C06_UFigure_6_9_details">
<summary>
Figure details
</summary>
<p>The factors are as follows:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Mindset: authentic in leading learning, excited by possibilities,
willingness to try new things, open-minded to new technologies</p></li>
<li><p>Skillset: storytelling, marketing skills, community management
skills, facilitating collaboration, coaching</p></li>
<li><p>Toolset: your P L N, a list of internal experts, the Net model,
knowledge management, coaching models, knowledge of social
technologies</p></li>
<li><p>Dataset: marketing data, social media reporting, enterprise
social network reporting, information on where the conversations are
taking place</p></li>
</ul>
</details>
</figure>

<aside aria-label="Tip (6.2)" class="tip" id="_08_CHAPTER_C06_sec_004" role="complementary">

<figure id="_08_CHAPTER_C06_UFigure_6_5" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF005.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_08_CHAPTER_C06_UTable_6_1" class="table">
<p><a href="#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml__08_CHAPTER_C06_sec_005">Skip
table</a></p>
<div class="table" role="table" tabindex="0">
<table class="left">
<thead>
<tr>
<th scope="col"><p>Tweet</p></th>
<th scope="col"><p>Tips checklist</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><p>12-Jan-15 Have the sales team video their best pitch and peer
review. The power of open peer support is invaluable
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Peer review upskills everyone</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>05-Feb-15 If you’ve a social network at work, you’ll need to
encourage others by continued contributions, ask questions
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Regularly encourage engagement</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>02-Mar-15 Use social networks before &amp; after a company
conference to keep it alive with videos, sharing, networking
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Keep learning alive in social spaces</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><span id="08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_137" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 137" role="doc-pagebreak"></span>12-Mar-15 Unlock the
potential of ESNs with regular active call to action campaigns. Give
people reasons to engage #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Make use of enterprise social networks</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>18-Mar-15 Encourage the company’s most engaging presenter to
share what they do well in a slideshare. Try new things
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Showcase great practice</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>30-Mar-15 Create a platform for in-house knowledge sharing by all
staff. Try Chatter, Google+, Sharepoint or Facebook #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Find a suitable social space</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>20-Jul-15 Harder to train in the summer due to vacations? Try
Brown Bag Lunch &amp; Learn to keep learning ticking over
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Try a ‘brown bag session’</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>24-Jul-15 Benefiting from wisdom of others has been the way of
learning since forever; allow it to happen in your org
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>History shows social learning works</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>03-Aug-15 Social informal L&amp;D ideas can feel risky to
business as they require allowing adults to have control &amp; trust
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Trust people</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>07-Aug-15 Normalise learning as an everyday thing with SLT
leading, ask “What was learnt today?” plus share their learning
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Make sharing learning the norm</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>17-Aug-15 A non tech way to improve is to create expert’s
checklists. Share good practice within your org via peer to peer
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Checklists made great job aids</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>20-Aug-15 A non tech way to improve is Lunch &amp; Learn;
internal expert sharing their knowledge &amp; their story over food
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Who doesn’t love stories &amp; food?</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>16-Nov-15 In amongst all the digital learning, don’t forget the
value of bringing people together. It’s social learning
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Bring people together</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>25-Nov-15 A little victory to try is Lunch &amp; Learn. Leverage
internal experts. Film their session to share internally
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Leverage internal experts</strong></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
</figure>

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (6.3)" class="box" id="_08_CHAPTER_C06_sec_005" role="complementary">

<figure id="_08_CHAPTER_C06_UFigure_6_6" class="figure">
<p><span id="08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_138" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 138" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF006.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Where is social learning happening in your organisation?

-   Is social learning evenly and fairly distributed amongst those who
    could benefit from it?

-   How are L&D involved in social learning now, and how could they be?
    Do L&Ders in your organisation model good social learning?

-   How is tacit knowledge shared and managed?

-   How friction-free is social learning in your organisation?

-   Who are your willing internal experts?

-   What is the culture around trust in your organisation?

-   How 'on brand' is your learning offer?

-   Where is energy spent usefully in your organisation?

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (6.4)" class="box" id="_08_CHAPTER_C06_sec_006" role="complementary">

<figure id="_08_CHAPTER_C06_UFigure_6_7" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF007.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Start with what you have personally, then build.

-   Start with what your colleagues are doing, and build.

-   Lunch and learns.

-   Networking.

-   Mentoring / reverse mentoring.

-   Curation.

-   Communities of practice.

-   Work on trust.

-   Don't try to control everything. You can't. And that's ok.

</aside>

::: {#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml__08_CHAPTER_C06_sec_007 .section .references .bibliography aria-label="THE LIBRARY LIST (6.5)" role="doc-bibliography"}
<figure id="_08_CHAPTER_C06_UFigure_6_8" class="figure">
<p><span id="08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_139" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 139" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF008.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Britz, M and Tyer, J (2020) *Social By Design*, n.p. Sense & Respond
    Press

-   Ferguson, O and Scott, S (2016) *Google it: The secret online lives
    of UK managers*, GoodPractice, Emerald Works, Edinburgh

-   LTSF2020 Online (2020) A Social Organisation is a Learning
    Organisation, *YouTube* \[online\]
    [[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kfHA3oP5TVE]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kfHA3oP5TVE)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/CJV7-8X2H]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/CJV7-8X2H))

-   Lave, J and Wenger, A (1991) *Situated Learning: Legitimate
    peripheral participation*, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge

-   Stodd, J (2012) *Exploring the World of Social Learning*, Sea Salt
    Publishing, London

-   Stodd, J (2016) *The Social Leadership Handbook*, 2^nd^ edition, Sea
    Salt Publishing, London

-   Stodd, J (2018) *The Trust Guidebook*, Sea Salt Publishing, London

-   Timms, P (2020) *The Energized Workplace*, Kogan Page, London

-   Wenger, E, McDermott, R and Snyder, W (2002) *Cultivating
    Communities of Practice*, Harvard Business Press, Boston
:::

::: {#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml__08_CHAPTER_C06_sec_008 .section .endnotes aria-labelledby="_08_CHAPTER_C06_h1_008"}
# Notes {#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml__08_CHAPTER_C06_h1_008 .title}

[1](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml__08_CHAPTER_C06_Endnote_6_1_reference) The
Royal Society for Arts, Manufactures and Commerce,
[[www.thersa.org/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.thersa.org/) (archived at
[[https://perma.cc/4897-FRYR]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/4897-FRYR))

[2](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml__08_CHAPTER_C06_Endnote_6_2_reference) Albert
Bandura's Social Learning Theory,
[[www.learning-theories.com/social-learning-theory-bandura.html]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.learning-theories.com/social-learning-theory-bandura.html)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/2WTY-YS6A]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/2WTY-YS6A))

[3](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml__08_CHAPTER_C06_Endnote_6_3_reference) Nikola
Tesla: 'When wireless is perfectly applied the whole earth will be
converted into a huge brain, which in fact it is, all things being
particles of a real and rhythmic whole. We shall be able to communicate
with one another instantly, irrespective of distance. Not only this, but
through television and telephony we shall see and hear one another as
perfectly as though we were face to face, despite intervening distances
of thousands of miles; and the instruments through which we shall be
able to do this will be amazingly simple compared with our present
telephone. A man will be able to carry one in his vest pocket.'
[[www.teslauniverse.com/nikola-tesla/quotes/38]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.teslauniverse.com/nikola-tesla/quotes/38)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/2QG8-WM8R]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/2QG8-WM8R))

[]{#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml_page_140 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 140"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[4](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml__08_CHAPTER_C06_Endnote_6_4_reference)
Wenger-Traynor at their website on Communities of Practice:
[[www.wenger-trayner.com/resources/what-is-a-community-of-practice/]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.wenger-trayner.com/resources/what-is-a-community-of-practice/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/FB7Z-3B9Z]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/FB7Z-3B9Z))

[5](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml__08_CHAPTER_C06_Endnote_6_5_reference) Of the
32.6 million in employment, around 1.7 million people reported working
mainly from home, with around 4.0 million working from home in the week
prior to being interviewed for the survey. Around 8.7 million people
said that they have worked from home; this is less than 30 per cent of
the workforce.
[[www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/employmentandemployeetypes/articles/coronavirusandhomeworkingintheuklabourmarket/2019]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/employmentandemployeetypes/articles/coronavirusandhomeworkingintheuklabourmarket/2019)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/6RAE-8HSJ]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/6RAE-8HSJ))

[6](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml__08_CHAPTER_C06_Endnote_6_6_reference) Nearly
60 per cent of people working from home due to Covid-19 were content
with waiting until the end of May at the earliest before returning to
the office. Three out of five people would like to work from home more
often than they did before the lockdown
[[www.thehrdirector.com/business-news/future-of-work/uk-workers-say-they-will-continue-to-work-from-home-after-lockdown-is-eased-and-majority-are-happy-to-wait-another-month-before-returning-to-the-office/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.thehrdirector.com/business-news/future-of-work/uk-workers-say-they-will-continue-to-work-from-home-after-lockdown-is-eased-and-majority-are-happy-to-wait-another-month-before-returning-to-the-office/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/X9FN-W53M]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/X9FN-W53M))
:::

[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

<div>

[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_141 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 141"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[[07]{.ordinal
.ordinal}](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_09_CHAPTER_C07_sec_001)

# [Digital Learning](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_09_CHAPTER_C07_sec_001) {#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_h1_001 .title}

Steps to building a business case for digital learning

</div>

<figure id="_09_CHAPTER_C07_UFigure_7_1" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF001.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

The digital revolution has enabled connectivity in a new way. Whereas in
the past we had to physically be with someone, or at least have their
phone number to share our stories, our experiences and our learning,
with digital technologies those physical barriers are broken down. We
can be brilliant friends with someone we have never met. The growth of
community online meets an inbuilt need within us as humans to connect to
others. In the past, we had a physical local community. We knew our
neighbours, we went to local schools to learn, we worked near where we
lived. Nowadays, these things are not the same: neighbours are out all
day at work, we can learn in a variety of locations and online, we
commute to work, including overseas business trips. So where is
community? It is not surprising that we no longer solely find community
in a physical geography, but in shared interests online too. These
digital social learning environments are all around us -- common
interest forums, specialist interest chats, sports groups, hobby forums,
parenting sites, health support networks. Whatever you are looking for,
you can find like-minded people to discuss it with. If people are so
motivated, technology is an enabler to learning communities, not a
detractor. People are very skilled at forming, motivating, sustaining
and working together. Bruce Tuckman's stages of group dynamics have
relevance even in the online
world[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_1_reference
.anchor}^[1](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_1)^.

[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_142 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 142"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Yet despite people finding community in digital
spaces, in work, digital learning can have a bad reputation, largely due
to decades of bad
e-learning[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_2_reference
.anchor}^[2](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_2)^. From a
less than auspicious start, digital learning remains less than popular
in businesses due to the quality on offer. It is curious that technology
was once the sole domain of 'the computer room' in the office; then
technology got smaller, more powerful and more affordable. At that
point, tech at work was overtaken by personal technology. Having a
desktop computer and a Blackberry at work was normal. Having a laptop
and an iPhone at home was normal. With better technology in your pocket,
who would want to sit at a computer working through click-next,
quiz-at-the-end e-learning? How much has L&D really moved on from this
approach at work? It is little wonder, then, that face-to-face is
preferable to online when it comes to learning, as David Kelly,
Executive Director of The eLearning Guild, suggests:

> Our industry tends to look at new technologies and ask, 'How do I do
> what I do with this new tech?' That's the wrong question, because it
> carries the blinders of 'What I do'. It's the reason why early
> e-learning was little more than taking the classroom-based materials
> and making them accessible via a computer. We took what learning
> looked like... and forced it into a computer. (Wheeler, 2019, p82)

It is hard to imagine that any L&D department has not embraced digital
learning post-2020. Out of necessity rather than choice, the world moved
online. Stories emerged of all kinds of people having to quickly upskill
on digital, from local authorities giving out laptops, religious and
community leaders becoming YouTubers, CEOs becoming news editors for
their own internal comms, and teachers switching to Google Meet instead
of their classrooms. Does this necessity mean a permanent shift to
online?

Maybe because 2020 thrust people into a situation where they had to
work, learn and live remotely, or they were working on the frontline and
were so busy there was little time to learn, people will finally have
had the motivation to make the transition to digital learning at work.
Given that so many people are working from home and don't want to go
back to the office, remote digital learning does seem to now be the
natural follow-on from remote working. There must hardly be a
traditional training company that hasn't now considered digital options.

Digital technologies are so ingrained in our modern world and
understanding of learning in our personal time -- from knitting to
changing a bathroom tap -- why would you *not* shift to using digital
learning []{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_143 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 143" role="doc-pagebreak"}professionally? What's
possible with YouTube and Google at home is also available at work, yet
often we revert to old-fashioned ways of learning. Perhaps they don't
feel they are allowed to use such sites for learning at work. Or they
don't feel invested in if they haven't been out of the office on a
course.

So, although there may have been a technical shift to digital, we don't
yet fully understand whether there has been an equal cultural shift.
It's perhaps too early to say, but already there are stories of Zoom
fatigue, excessive screen time, and a feeling of loss from not being
with colleagues. Trish Uhl suggests in the Foreword to *The Energized
Workplace*, 'Between Zoom Zombies and double shifts, people are burning
out' (Timms, 2020).

Will people really want to learn online long term, or will we actually
see a swift return to face-to-face as soon as we can? Will learning
become all about the biscuits again? CIPD's 2020 *Learning and Skills at
Work* report states that 'Face-to-face and in-house methods of delivery
and development models remain popular... in just under half of
organisations, the use of digital (47%) and blended learning (43%) is
limited, delivering less than 20% of learning' (p19).

Changing to digital is powerful. Digital is a useful tool, however. But,
there will always be a place for face-to-face. Adding digital and social
learning to your learning provision will always give a better, more
holistic offer to learners, as we will discuss in [Chapter
8](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml). But once that shift to digital has happened,
there is no turning back; or at least I sincerely hope not.

Economic factors are always an important consideration in digital
learning, and will potentially be even more so in the future. Depending
on the economic point of view of an organisation in correlation to the
value placed on L&D, the implementation of a digital learning offer is
either too expensive to justify it or it is an absolute necessity to
save money on face-to-face learning. Layer on the potential size of any
global economic downturn, and the case for digital learning may move up
even the most dismissive of company agendas.

But even in the midst of a global recession, cost savings should never
be the primary driver for digital learning. I am a strong proponent of
the implementation of digital because it is what is needed by learners,
not because it is cheap. If the latter is the driver, it is likely you
will end up with a digital offer that is not much more effective than
the terrible e-learning of the past. When it comes to digital learning,
you definitely get what you pay for.

Having gone through the process of strategic understanding, stakeholder
engagement and consultative L&D, your evidence and data should be clear
[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_144 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 144"
role="doc-pagebreak"}on the digital direction you need to take. Perhaps
you need a video-based comms platform to reach your workers with key
messages whilst out on the road. Or maybe you are in a heavily regulated
industry and need to be able to demonstrate real learning around
compliance. Or maybe it is just the ability to facilitate peer-to-peer
learning that needs addressing. As with anything in L&D, you absolutely
need to be clear about your whys for digital learning. Only then can you
be clear on your business case.

<figure id="_09_CHAPTER_C07_UFigure_7_2" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF002.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

[The digital
community](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_09_CHAPTER_C07_h3_001)

The best keynote I have ever seen at any conference was given by Deborah
Frances-White at Learning Technologies
2017[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_3_reference
.anchor}^[3](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_3)^. At the
UK's premier learning tech conference, she had the auditorium in the
palm of her hand without any tech at all. It was brilliant. But how is
this relevant? It was all about communication. When we start with the
tech, we get it the wrong way round. The focus in this chapter is on how
we can encourage our organisations to help people learn with and from
each other, from curated and created content, and from learning pathways
presented across a blend of methods of learning through the use of
digital learning. The late great Jay Cross said 'Conversation is the
most effective learning technology ever invented' (Jarche, 2010), so to
enable technologies that empower more conversation is a gift to learning
in your organisation. I believe by building a community of connected,
collaborative, co-creative learners, L&D will impact the success of your
organisation. We will look at the drivers to build a business case for
modern L&D incorporating digital and social learning, but always with a
reminder to focus on your learners first.

I am not going to talk too much about digital tools because that is a
book (or two) in itself, but if you want to know more, then the learning
innovations consultant Steve Wheeler has a lot to say on this and has
written an excellent book *Digital Learning in Organisations* (2019).
Donald H Taylor's book *Learning Technologies in the Workplace* (2017)
is equally as useful.

[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_145 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 145"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[The beginnings of a business case for
digital](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_09_CHAPTER_C07_h3_002)

Something crucial to consider is the fact that people are used to
consumer-grade technologies in their private lives, and it is reasonable
for them to expect consumer-grade experiences at work. These
expectations are valid in today's world of L&D and there is no real
excuse for not meeting them. The experience of your customer, the
learner, should always sit at the heart of the learning you offer. If
that requires consumer-grade tech, this is what you need to head
towards, and this is why you will need a business case.

To establish direction on your digital L&D strategy, your first
conversation ought to be with IT. What technologies do you have, what
could you have, what do people need? Be sure not to only ask about
learning technologies -- you can also do a lot with tech tools that are
not designed specifically for learning; for example, you can make simple
videos using PowerPoint transitions and a
voiceover[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_4_reference
.anchor}^[4](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_4)^. IT
departments often have product managers and each is responsible for
ensuring their product serves the needs of the internal customer. My
advice is to listen and learn why certain products were chosen, how they
weave into the delicate balance of other products, what value they bring
at what cost (although, realistically you may be unlikely to get that
information unless you have a close relationship). I am keen to suggest
you do not to go in demanding new learning tech so you can offer digital
learning. Rather, like all things I advocate for, be respectful, be
kind, and start with what you have.

[Start with what you
have](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_09_CHAPTER_C07_h3_003)

I was once involved in running a leadership programme for a retail
organisation, and when we asked what we could do digitally, we were told
that, because of the retail setting, managers did not have access to
technology, so were not embracing digital learning. That's why we were
asked to deliver a face-to-face session.

On the day, it very quickly became apparent that digital learning was
happening in the organisation, but that it wasn't recognised or
acknowledged by the L&D team who hired us. The training involved store
managers from all around the country, and as the session started, we
discovered they all knew each other. How? Because they had WhatsApp
groups. They regularly shared photographs of successful store
promotions, they asked each other about how to deal with difficult staff
and customers, or which store layouts were working. They were using a
social media tool for social []{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_146
.pagebreak aria-label="Page 146" role="doc-pagebreak"}learning (see
[Chapter 6](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml) for more on that). They were
actively, effectively engaged in digital learning, just as lots of
people in other organisations are. The facts in this situation were
simple: the L&D department wasn't prepared to see the reality. It was
out of touch with what was happening on the ground. Had we known, the
learning design would have been very different.

This kind of approach to workplace learning (sharing via WhatsApp) is
totally normal, and if we in L&D don't recognise and embrace it we are
missing a real opportunity to help learning land well. We risk holding
our learners (and our organisations) back, or risk becoming a redundant,
out-of-date irrelevance. Stakeholders everywhere want and expect to have
learning at the point of need, and that is precisely what digital
provides, so our role is to facilitate it.

[Different types of digital
learning](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_09_CHAPTER_C07_h3_004)

In starting with what you have, don't rule anything out. There are many
types of learning technologies, not just the main things that might come
to mind -- learning management systems, learning experience systems,
webinars and videos, for example. Don't forget infographics, podcasts,
animations, digital magazines, audio books and more. All these are well
within the reach of all L&D departments today. Something like Adobe
Spark, for example, can help with easy-to-make video. And with a good
microphone and smartphone, a podcast is easily within our grasp too.

Something more substantial, such as a learning management system, does
need more work to implement. Think carefully about your user experience.
Get yourself a great project manager who understands learning
techno­logies, which can be complex and multi layered, unlike other
technologies, to run the implementation. If you cannot hire one, get
advice from one. Substantial capital spend needs strong evidence and a
proper tender process.

Personally, however, I would start small with technology for learning
and not change everything at once. I would run small trials of differing
content and of possible platforms (ask vendors for a sandbox to play
with). That way you can really know what your organisation is receptive
to and ready for. This 'try before you buy' approach is a powerful
evidence-gathering opportunity.

[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_147 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 147"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[Focus on
motivation](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_09_CHAPTER_C07_h3_005)

The opportunity for someone to learn is gifted to them only when they
want to learn. The tools, the techniques and the knowledge are
irrelevant if someone is not motivated to do so. Learning is personal to
everyone -- their needs, their memories, their interests. Yet we put on
courses which are impersonal; we 'sheep-dip' people through the exact
same experience whether they need it or
not.[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_5_reference
.anchor}^[5](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_5)^ How
many e-learning programmes amounting to nothing will you put people
through without realising they need to want to learn in the first place?
And they want to learn in a way they find motivating. Just because we
can (i.e. it can be cheap and compliant to put people through
e-learning), doesn't mean we should.

Even with knowing there is a need, learner motivation can be low for any
learning, but particularly online learning, which is often perceived to
be a sedentary, lonely, passive experience, without the benefit of
getting out of the office and networking, like 'real' learning. We are
social beings. We really have to push ourselves to spend even more daily
work time in front of a computer for learning.

When you consider the volume of good content freely available on the
internet, such as FutureLearn programmes, TED talks, podcasts, YouTube
videos, etc., the fact that not everyone is consuming this content all
the time indicates motivation really is needed in order to engage. It is
no good just providing access to technology. L&D has a role to play as
motivator, and never more explicitly than now. We have to get people
through all kinds of learning experiences, from mandatory compliance
training to self-development experiential learning; being willing to
engage and do the learning makes our job much easier.

So how do we get people to look forward to learning about health and
safety or anti-bribery and corruption? Ditch your 30-minute click-next,
quiz-at-the-end e-learning for a start. Boring learning that exists only
to tick a box will never motivate anyone. What does more engaging,
effective digital learning look like? To be effective, it needs
analysis, good curation and engaging internal marketing.

One clear solution to this problem is easy -- digital learning should
always be short, convenient, and feel very obviously relevant to the
learner. Even better if it does not interrupt the flow of work, but, in
fact, enhances it -- for example, intuitive online help functionality
for software. The 'sell' of digital learning is easier if we are
explicit in providing outcomes-driven digital learning and shout about
the benefits: short interventions at point of need
[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_148 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 148"
role="doc-pagebreak"}that are useful and impactful with clear links to
business goals, and consumer-grade quality content and technology. This
isn't to say it will be perfect -- a lot of consumer video is homemade,
but is popular, especially if it has good sound quality; in general,
people will accept poor visuals but not poor
sound[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_6_reference
.anchor}^[6](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_6)^. Play
into their business measures to help learners make clearly connected
links from learning to work. People will be more motivated to learn when
the learning offers a quick win and they can see how it will impact on
their work and pay cheque.

[The cultural
shift](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_09_CHAPTER_C07_h3_006)

Motivation of the individual alone is not enough to ensure the success
of digital learning in an organisation. Alongside it sits the need
within a business for a digital technologies cultural shift. A lot of
what we are considering in this chapter is not about digital
technologies per se, but the culture that sits around them, in
particular the trust in using technology and the skills to do so.
Without a cultural shift to accept digital, any digital learning offer
could be potentially problematic. People will remain unsure of what the
normalised behaviours in the workplace are. Can that keen individual
watch a TED talk at work? Are they allowed to use their own smartphone
for work apps? Can they complete a Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) in
work time? People need to know it is ok to learn digitally at work. The
permission and culture piece is a big part of digital learning's
success, as will be explored further in [Chapter
10](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml).

There is an argument that says if the use of digital is so ingrained in
everyday life, L&D doesn't need to specifically harness digital learning
technologies within work, because why should we care if people can find
what they need? They have the skills, it is normal behaviour, so why
bother? Leave them to it.

The truth and the reasoning sits somewhere between the perceived normal
realities and workplace realities. Not everyone is able to access
digital in their everyday life. Statements that everyone is online come
from a place of privilege. The reality can be far from that, both at
home and at work. Digital may be a common part of people's private
lives, but it is not yet as ubiquitous in workplaces as you might expect
-- and vice versa, even in First World countries. Certainly not all
workplaces have the hardware or skills to cope with a digital learning
environment. Don't embarrass people by assuming that everyone has
digital access and digital skills. Find out.

[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_149 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 149"
role="doc-pagebreak"}L&D should take the lead in helping people use
digital in their workplace. Consider hosting regular open drop-in
surgeries for people to bring their tech challenges. Most people are
able to use email, so share new digital ideas in that space, as they
understand it and feel comfortable there. You could share top tips for
digital, or links to digital tools alongside success stories of how
people in your organisation have used the tools. You could challenge
people to share ideas and tools they are using, perhaps outside of work.
Essentially, cultural shift will only happen if you know your people,
know your strategic intent, and create the shift to fill the gaps.

[Trust and
technology](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_09_CHAPTER_C07_h3_007)

Trust is part of the cultural shift, and is equally as important as
permission and skills. With the retail managers in a previous example,
the digital learning was covert. Head office weren't aware of it,
through no real fault of their own, other than they never actually
asked. The corporate culture was at odds with the reality. In using tech
they know and have access to, people naturally build trust with each
other in these digital spaces. The retail managers trusted each other to
behave correctly, share appropriately, hold each others' counsel, and
keep the secret tech use a secret. Such behaviours and technologies
become part of 'the way we do things around here'.

As artist and consultant Doug Shaw is famed for stating, 'proceed until
apprehended' is very much the attitude taken by people when a company
fails to provide the tools needed to do the
work.[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_7_reference
.anchor}^[7](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_7)^ People
will find their own way. For example, if a business locks down YouTube
and someone needs to see how to do something, they will simply pick up
their smartphone and access YouTube there instead. Digital learning is
happening on work premises, in work time, to enable people to do the
work they are paid to do, whether L&D provide it or not.

Covertly used tech is much harder to replace with 'authorised'
techno­logies as a result of the high trust environments in which they
operate, and the ingrained behaviours they lead to. Introducing
'authorised' technologies forces them to compete to become trusted
spaces. Such spaces are where people treat each other as adults and
respect the appropriate use of the technology. As mentioned in [Chapter
6](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml), social learning tools enable so much trust to
be built up that actual strangers can become friends. A culture of trust
is needed to fuel digital learning. This adds further credence to
starting with where people are when introducing learning technologies
and building from there, rather than introducing something new.

[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_150 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 150"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[Moving with the pace of
change](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_09_CHAPTER_C07_h3_008)

As we develop our business case for digital learning, there are many
drivers we could consider. There is none so persuasive as the lockdown
experienced during 2020. However, even outside Covid-19, there are
fundamental drivers which make the argument for digital learning even
more compelling than because we 'had to' during lockdown.

Work has changed a lot, but workplace learning hasn't necessarily kept
up. Despite Covid-19, we hear from clients that people are longing for
face-to-face, formal classroom environments. People have missed out on
conferences too, and they are feeling it. They are longing for a real
connection with real people, which could be why they would rather not
have more workplace digital learning. Working from home during a global
pandemic meant actually trying to work in our homes with our families
whilst homeschooling and staying healthy, *plus* hours of screen time on
MS Teams or Zoom meetings. It was not working from home. It was
difficult, challenging, and lonely.

It makes sense for some people to want face-to-face learning in a formal
setting due to screen time fatigue and a desire for human connection.
Yet it also makes sense that L&D must be more than 'injection
education'. We must consider the whole end-to-end approach to our
learning offer so that we are able to react fast as our workplaces
evolve. We must be agile -- a somewhat trendy word meaning able to work
at the pace of change. Being able to respond to needs, as we did at the
time of a pandemic, which saw many learning organisations move quickly
to live online classrooms (of varying degrees of quality), is exactly
the reason we need to have a broad offer. Irrespective of the pandemic,
we cannot get caught out offering only one route to learning, as we know
our audience, whomever and wherever they are, will always have a breadth
of needs for us to support. Our own lack of skills or motivation,
unfortunately, cannot be an excuse. We need to start pushing ourselves
harder to keep up, not least because otherwise people in the
organisation could be racing past us. We simply cannot afford to fall
behind.

[The changing nature of
work](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_09_CHAPTER_C07_h3_009)

The nature of work has undoubtedly changed. It is more complex than it
has ever been before. It is more geographically dispersed, in that we
have global workforces and we are no longer tied to working at one desk
in one []{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_151 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 151" role="doc-pagebreak"}office space. We can work
remotely from home, from multiple offices, from cafes, on the move,
albeit I acknowledge this is a privilege afforded only to white-collar
workers. Work is more flexible (with the potential to go further, in my
opinion). We have flexible working patterns, remote working, home
working, part-time working, project-based working, gig working. Work is
more appropriate to a fulfilling life, and the call for this flexibility
will only intensify. Anna Whitehouse, who is more commonly known as
'Mother Pukka' on social media and the radio, has successfully
campaigned for a change of approach to flexible
work[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_8_reference
.anchor}^[8](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_8)^. Work
can fit around other things without a dip in productivity, and
organisations saw that during Covid-19. Flexible learning is a
pre-requisite for the future.

Physical workplaces had already started to change with hot desking, chat
pods, social areas, even games tables and slides. Post-2020, they have
now become almost unrecognisable, with socially distanced desks, one-way
systems and Perspex shields. Physical spaces are progressively more
digitally enabled -- swipe on entry, facial recognition, communication
apps and software. It stands to reason, therefore, that L&D will also
need to adapt to the changing nature of work.

Some L&Ders have already considered the future of work and how we need
to offer more flexible learning via multiple methodologies. The top
performing organisations, as shown in the Towards Maturity report
*Challenging Perceptions*, are meeting the needs of learners, including
giving choice on where, when and how learners access learning (Daly,
2019, p7). Sometimes it's the really simple things that we get wrong,
such as providing 9-5 solutions to a workforce that works 24 hours a
day. What about those doing the 5pm-9am shift? When and how does their
learning happen? Or maybe we provide a one-day learning opportunity
face-to-face in a hotel room and expect this injection education to
stick and be remembered in a different context on a different day in the
moment when learners apply their learning in real work. What are we
offering to support in that moment? When and how does that learning
application make sense of the learning? As noted in [Chapter
1](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml), it is old-world thinking applied to new-world
technology.

[Knowledge
management](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_09_CHAPTER_C07_h3_010)

Another driver for digital learning is knowledge management. I've
already talked about knowledge management in [Chapter
6](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml), but it's relevant to this chapter as digital
is a way of cataloguing, storing and managing tacit
[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_152 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 152"
role="doc-pagebreak"}knowledge. Digital can really help us get knowledge
from one person to another so that knowledge can be accessed by those in
need, nor lost when people leave your organisation. We live very much in
a knowledge-rich age, in all sorts of ways. Digital shapes our daily
lives, its absence is noticeable.

Whether a digital native or not, all this digital push can feel
overwhelming. We need to support our learners to understand and accept
digital, and to adapt to it. I remain impressed with the work at
Aylesbury Vale District Council when I interviewed them for Learning Now
TV. They have installed Amazon Alexas in vulnerable residents' homes to
enable them to order council services such as emptying bins or meals on
wheels. They talked about using AI to support phone operators in the
council
too[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_9_reference
.anchor}^[9](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_9)^. People
are so much more aware of everything that's going with 24-hour news.
Organisations are expected to react quickly. We have smart phones, and
we are used to operating 24/7. So, although the pace of life slowed down
considerably for many of us during the coronavirus spring/summer, we
were able to keep working and keep learning because of all the digital
tools available. Because the knowledge is out there, accessible to
everyone (or at least, everyone with a smart phone), we don't switch
off. Is there anyone now who can honestly say they don't live a digital
life, even if they don't want to?

[Digital learning
drivers](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_09_CHAPTER_C07_h3_011)

You need to identify where your colleagues are now on their digital
skills and tech journey. Remember, don't assume. Once you have found
that out, sense check whether that is at odds with your company culture
in relation to learning technologies. You can then work through the
following checklists to build your business case for digital learning in
your workplace. There are 10 reasons L&D should be harnessing the
learning power of digital, then 10 guidance notes for when you come to
implement digital. Everyone's situation is different. Nonetheless, I
hope they are useful for helping you understand digital learning in your
workplace.

Top 10 reasons for digital learning:

1.  Personalised learning through more routes to learning

2.  Supporting a dispersed workforce

3.  Facilitating seamless learning and work

4.  Anytime, anyplace, and anywhere learning

5.  Supporting social learning and collaboration

6.  []{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_153 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 153"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}Enabling co-creation of ideas

7.  Stronger, more well-connected companies

8.  Meeting learners' expectations, especially around accessibility

9.  Empowering self-directed learning

10. Reducing costs in both time and money

Top 10 guidance notes for the use of digital technologies:

1.  Use technologies which feel like personal social platforms so people
    know how to use them quickly, as they help with trust.

2.  Think carefully about those with limited broadband or tech access
    and help them be included.

3.  Ensure the environment, permission and company culture support the
    use of digital learning.

4.  Have a great search function so people can access learning easily
    and in the flow of work.

5.  Don't be too precious about how people use the tech; let them find
    their own rhythms.

6.  Gain advocacy from your early adopters so you are not a lone voice.

7.  Share positive news stories on digital learning benefits.

8.  Regularly check in with learners to see they are getting what they
    need.

9.  Ensure there are no blockers to accessing digital learning.

10. Share the cost savings from digital learning, although only with
    those who need to know.

And one extra piece of advice -- please don't use digital just for
compliance learning. Nobody will ever be keen to engage with a wider
curriculum if that is your biggest driver.

[The benefits of digital
community](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_09_CHAPTER_C07_h3_012)

Having looked at your main drivers for digital learning -- your why --
next you need to consider the outcomes, the benefits for your
organisation. The benefits of embracing digital learning can be immense,
such as boosting employee engagement. For example, when we launched a
social learning platform at Santa Fe Group, it took just weeks to get to
high engagement. We had around 4,500 content views in the first week
from a user population []{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_154 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 154" role="doc-pagebreak"}of around 1,500. In a company
newsletter three months after launch, I wrote about how we imagined the
adoption curve to be four months; however, we were utterly stunned by
how much engagement happened in just a few weeks. Three months
post-launch, my role had changed to a digital community manager, as the
peer-to-peer learning was immense. In one of my favourite examples,
someone in France asked a question about a process near the end of their
working day. Overnight, it was answered by someone working from home in
Hawaii. That simply would never have happened without the digital
community. It could have taken weeks to find the person with the answer.

Enabling digital learning to happen at the point of need means you don't
interrupt the flow of work. People learn when they need to learn (as
opposed to waiting three months for a course), which also means that you
don't interrupt the speed of productivity. So, you are improving
engagement, speed and flow of work, productivity and performance all at
once.

Improving memory retention is also easier with digital. Months, indeed
days after a course, so much of the learning is forgotten. Digital
learning can be more brain-friendly learning with the use of memory
triggers such as strong imagery or a short soundbite. In addition, there
are options for aide-memoire digital reminders -- photos of learning
events, short video reminders, the sharing of co-created resources.
There are other technologies which can boost memory retention, such as
Clever Nelly from Elephants Don't Forget, which is an AI-based software
that asks regular follow-up questions and learns which elements a
learner needs more help, with which is of huge benefit in capitalising
on the spend of the initial learning.

Digitally-enhanced learning enables organisations to learn across and
through complexity, which is vital. The biggest benefit is that digital
is always there, like your little learning buddy, helping whenever you
are stuck. No amount of brilliant courses or facilitators can help you
in your moment of need. Onscreen help options -- the modern-day
equivalent of the Microsoft paperclip -- such as helpful screen overlays
are another way of using digital to benefit at point of need and boost
memory retention.

All of these digital benefits are critically important in a world that
is complex and doesn't slow down. The digital train has left the station
and we all need to be on
board[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_10_reference
.anchor}^[10](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_10)^. A
word of caution: don't jump onto that train until you are ready. As
Donald Clark said, 'Media rich is not mind rich', so just because you
can doesn't mean you
should[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_11_reference
.anchor}^[11](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_11)^.
Digital learning needs to be right for your organisation.

[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_155 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 155"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[Digital learning in an organisational
context](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_09_CHAPTER_C07_h3_013)

As well as seeing the overall picture, you also need to understand the
specific context of your organisation in relation to digital learning.
So, say you work in a medical environment or fire safety, then VR or
animated digital learning solutions can be fantastic, safe ways for
people to learn. Pharmaceutical companies, for example, use expensive
machines. Prior to VR, a training version of a machine would be moved
around the globe in order to train people in how to use it. Invariably,
it would be damaged or broken from time to time as it was moved around,
and training would be interrupted while it was being fixed (at great
expense). With VR, however, all of this risk is removed and, for a
fraction of the price, you have a very effective learning tool.

Similarly, a retail store provided their in-store staff with iPhones and
iPads to enable them to offer seamless service to customers, buying
online if their selected item wasn't in store. To train people on how to
use the service, they had a mock-up app on the devices which enable
experiential learning. It was effective and simple; often, the best use
of tech is. They won gold Learning Technology Awards as a result.
Checking out the stories of the industry award winners is a great way to
get inspiration for how you could use technology. Search through
Learning Technology Awards, Learning Awards, Brandon Hall Excellence
Awards, Training Journal Awards and People Management Awards.

[How does L&D keep
up?](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_09_CHAPTER_C07_h3_014)

In addition to learning from the award winners and fostering your
relationship with your IT crowd as a starting position, I advise you to
have a go. Modern technologies are designed with the user in mind. They
should not be hard to fathom, and where they are not so intuitive they
have online help manuals, user forums and lots of videos too. From a
self-directed learning perspective, learning to use tech is a perfect
place to start.

If you are investing in learning technologies, be sure to ask what
support the vendor has available. Do they have dedicated customer
success consultants? How often can they help you? Is it a full
hand-holding service? Any decent vendor should want you to do well with
their technology and they should be willing to support you in learning
how to maximise the benefits and make the most of their platform.

[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_156 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 156"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Ultimately, however, armed with your knowledge of
the need and benefits, you need to engage yourself. Try joining a
webinar or a MOOC -- how engaging was it? What could you do better?
Switch to ebooks from regular books -- what do you notice? Try
enterprise social networks first as a tiny trial -- find out why the
most popular content is popular. Just don't be afraid. Don't sit on the
sidelines, and certainly don't leave it for the younger people -- they
could be as afraid of it as you! Dive in, the water is lovely.

<aside aria-label="Case-Study (7.1)" class="case-study" epub:type="case-study" id="_09_CHAPTER_C07_sec_002" role="complementary">

<figure id="_09_CHAPTER_C07_UFigure_7_3" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF003.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

When I volunteered and was chosen to be Lead Volunteer for Learning &
Development at Girlguiding, I came into the role off the back of my own
experience of joining the Movement and learning how to become a Guide
Leader. The support scheme in place was very reliant on other volunteers
and their knowledge. In the main, this is excellent; Girlguiding
volunteers are very passionate and committed people. However, I was
aware that increasingly we were competing in an ever-more digital
environment and (potential) volunteers are busy people. It could feel
like a luxury to drive off to a County Training Day, giving up chunks of
my volunteer time to learning. When my team and I came together in April
2017, we knew our challenge was to offer learning to more volunteers and
potential volunteers where they were, rather than expecting them to come
to us. Our goal was reached.

**GIRLGUIDING FILTERED TRIAL**

**by the Volunteer L&D Team**

At Girlguiding, we have no digital learning platform for our 100,000+
volunteers. To go from zero to 100K would be costly for any
organisation, let alone a charity. Given our 100 years of face-to-face
learning history, in making any shift to digital learning, we needed to
be absolutely sure when spending members' and funders' money that we are
buying exactly what we were ready to receive.

To make any decision on the future direction of learning, we knew we had
to start with evidence gathering. Girlguiding as an organisation are
hugely consultative and collaborative. Both locally and nationally, the
staff and senior volunteers reach out to
[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_157 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 157"
role="doc-pagebreak"}volunteers, members and parents regularly for their
ideas and thoughts. In 2016, the Volunteer L&D Team had conducted an
extensive review of the Leadership Qualification (the training required
to run a local Girlguiding unit) and had clear evidence that relying on
face-to-face training, whilst good training, was not enough for
everyone. We continued to seek direction by talking to a lot of people,
including the Chief Guide and the Operations Board. The evidence was
overwhelming that we needed to bring in digital learning to add to the
face-to-face provision.

Initially, in response to this, we increased the quality and amount of
our e-learning offer, plus we brought in webinars as additional routes
for delivering the training for the new Guiding Programme, which
launched in the summer of 2018. However, with a cohort of over 100,000
volunteers, it was clear even these digital shifts would not be enough
to reach everyone. We began to investigate a digital learning platform.

We were very clear on our aim for the digital transformation: to improve
the volunteer learning journey and pathway (thereby supporting the
retention, motivation and recruitment of volunteers) that feeds into our
wider L&D strategy and digital transformation.

Even with that clarity, it was a big jump to go from no digital platform
to one for so many volunteers across the ages of 14 to 80+. Before such
a sizeable investment was made, we needed more data; we needed to be
really sure. We needed to know how our members and volunteers would
respond to digital learning. Would it work? Would they learn? Would they
use it? How could we be inclusive of those without digital skills? How
could we make it easy for busy volunteers to access learning?

We got together with Filtered for a trial to test both the types of
content our audience were receptive to and whether an AI-based chatbot
would be a welcome way in for an audience with limited digital
experience. We took a randomised selection of our audience and gave them
access to Filtered for six weeks. We loaded learning content from our
website and some curated content supplied by Filtered. We regularly
checked in on the data and adjusted the content approach iteratively to
give comparisons.

By running a tiny trial, we found out so much more than we anticipated.
Of course, it was wonderful to find that the trial proved very popular,
with one participant noting it was one of the best online learning
experiences she had ever had, and a very senior volunteer on the trial
calling it the future of learning for Girlguiding. Whilst these comments
were great to hear, we didn't want to get overly excited. What did the
data say? Our interest lay in the real reasons for the trial -- content
access and use. The data corroborated the positive feedback stories, and
indeed offered additional insights. For example, the data indicated that
although the content was on our website, volunteers had not seen it
before and they found it very useful. The types of content volunteers in
the trial looked at was also telling -- Knowing Guiding (content to help
volunteers 'do their job' in Guiding) was the most popular by a long
way, whereas wellbeing []{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_158 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 158" role="doc-pagebreak"}content was significantly
less so. This corroborated with what we already knew about our very
committed and hardworking volunteers, and shines a light on the impact
of attracting new volunteers who can't or don't want to give their all
to Guiding, but do have good things to offer. Whilst these were not
findings for the L&D team per se, they were useful in discussions across
teams.

Behaviours in the digital space are always interesting, particularly
from those less typically engaged with digital technologies. James Tyas
of Filtered, in his write-up of the trial, noted about the types of
content 'There is a strong preference to learning about Girlguiding from
Girlguiding' (Tyas, 2019). Peer learning is the tradition in Girlguiding
face-to-face training, with volunteer trainers teaching other
volunteers, so it was not surprising to find this was moving to the
digital space. We had strong evidence of the desire for volunteer-led
initiatives in learning, and this has influenced future planning and
thinking for the Volunteer L&D team.

One of the most important elements the digital trial demonstrated was
that 94 per cent of enrolled users were actively engaged with the
content. Given our huge, diverse demographic, this level of engagement
was hugely important. It showed there was very little issue with
onboarding or user understanding of the digital technology. Whilst we in
Girlguiding L&D may not have any digital learning innovation on offer,
it was clear our volunteers are already performing well in the digital
world. The data showed age was no barrier (supporting what I always say:
motivation is key, not age, when it comes to digital learning). The
intuitive nature of the platform together with the curiosity and can-do
attitude of a Girlguiding volunteer was a perfect combination.

The digital platform trial and the data it produced were more than
enough to secure a digital learning future at Girlguiding. These things
take time in a charity, and we are not quite there yet with implementing
a digital solution, although we're getting ever closer. Without the
value of the digital trial, however, we would still be convincing
stakeholders and funders of the direction of travel.

**The Case Study Reflections**

*This is an odd case study for my reflections, as it is my own team's
story. That in itself is a good reflection. How can you get enough
distance from a situation to look at it objectively and usefully? So
here are my (hopefully) objective reflections for your consideration,
having thought of your own:*

-   *Tiny trials are invaluable when it comes to implementing digital
    learning.*

-   *Whilst working to a hypothesis is a sound and useful principle in
    data gathering, don't be surprised by the information that spills
    from the data when you look for it.*

-   *The digital platform trial brought out a richness we could never
    have imagined, and it accelerated our thinking and strategic
    direction.*

-   []{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_159 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 159"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}*Having some data on digital learning impact,
    even if not as much data as we might want, was useful in stakeholder
    conversations.*

-   *Having content and having learners access content are not the same
    thing. Never underestimate the value of regular and frequent
    internal comms.*

-   *The ability to iterate content and the presentation of content to
    adjust to learner behaviour was crucial in this trial. Launching
    digital learning in cohorts is therefore a safer way to guarantee
    overall success.*

</aside>

<figure id="_09_CHAPTER_C07_UFigure_7_4" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF004.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_09_CHAPTER_C07_UFigure_7_9" class="figure"
aria-describedby="_09_CHAPTER_C07_UFigure_7_9_details">
<p><img src="content/images/M09UF001.png"
alt="The figure shows 4 clusters of factors." /></p>
<details id="_09_CHAPTER_C07_UFigure_7_9_details">
<summary>
Figure details
</summary>
<p>The factors are as follows:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Mindset: open-minded, embrace change, comfortable with ambiguity,
ability to juggle several things at once</p></li>
<li><p>Skillset: project management, implementation, digital tech and
digital content development, instructional design</p></li>
<li><p>Toolset: strategy, internal research on digital, digital vendors
and suppliers</p></li>
<li><p>Dataset: L M S or L X P or website or tools reporting, tiny trial
data</p></li>
</ul>
</details>
</figure>

<aside aria-label="Tip (7.2)" class="tip" id="_09_CHAPTER_C07_sec_004" role="complementary">

<figure id="_09_CHAPTER_C07_UFigure_7_5" class="figure">
<p><span id="09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_160" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 160" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF005.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_09_CHAPTER_C07_UTable_7_1" class="table">
<p><a href="#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_sec_005">Skip
table</a></p>
<div class="table" role="table" tabindex="0">
<table class="left">
<thead>
<tr>
<th scope="col"><p>Tweet</p></th>
<th scope="col"><p>Tips checklist</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><p>14-Jan-15 Offer quicker learning using video. 500 written words
is approx 1 minute of video. Which is more memorable?
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Make memorable videos</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>15-Jan-15 Do you have manuals? Make sure they are accessible, no
jargon, plenty of screen shots, great indexes #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Online manuals</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>03-Mar-15 You can pass more info over in video quicker than other
methods. Phone vids internally are fine #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Internally phone video is fine</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>09-Apr-15 Be aware if you build it, they will not come. With a
tech solution, always ask ‘What’s in it for them?’ #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Be sure of the WIIFM</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>10-Apr-15 There is nothing like a blooper reel to make the
learning stick in the mind. Have fun with video learning
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Blooper reels are fun</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>17-Apr-15 New systems can unnerve people. When introducing new
learning interventions, be sure people feel comfortable
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Comfort fixed mindsets</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>22-Apr-15 With new learning tech use your early adopters success
stories to reach laggards. They like proof of concept
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Share early adopter stories</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>19-May-15 If L&amp;D don’t provide a learning tech solution, rest
assured colleagues are finding their own. Embrace that
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Go where they are</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>12-Jun-15 Embrace the tech! A podcast made with @carowalmsley of
@BrightTweet Hope you enjoy! #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Make a podcast</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><span id="09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_161" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 161" role="doc-pagebreak"></span>11-Aug-15 Tech is a
tool allowing consistency of message across multiple locations and
people. How do you embrace tech? #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Tech offers consistency</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>17-Sep-15 Introducing tech may need imagination; Lunch &amp;
Learn via Skype, experts on CD, audio lessons via voicemail
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Be creative</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>21-Sep-15 Movie trailers get a lot of info over in a short time.
How could you use this idea in workplace learning? #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Make movie trailers</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>22-Sep-15 Videoing your experts keeps knowledge in your org even
if they leave. How do you future-proof your learning?
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Knowledge management</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>24-Sep-15 Animating your org’s best PowerPoints with a voiceover
or music is a quick, cheap way to make training videos
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Video can be cheap AND good</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>23-Oct-15 On use of tech in #LSGwebinar “It’s amazing as soon as
you get motivated how quickly the skills will follow”
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Find the motivation</strong></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
</figure>

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (7.3)" class="box" id="_09_CHAPTER_C07_sec_005" role="complementary">

<figure id="_09_CHAPTER_C07_UFigure_7_6" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF006.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   What is the history of digital learning in your organisation?

-   How is the history of digital learning hindering or helping new
    approaches?

-   What does community look like in your organisation?

-   How can you build a learning community, facilitated by digital
    technologies?

-   Do you know your why? How can you build your business case for
    investment in digital technologies?

-   Are you clear on your digital learning drivers?

-   []{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_162 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 162"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}How motivated are your learners? How do you
    know?

-   What technologies do your learners use now? Can you use them for
    learning?

-   How trusting is your organisation? What's your relationship with IT?

-   What culturally needs to shift to ensure success for digital
    learning?

-   What is the risk and cost of not investing in learning technologies?

-   What are you doing to keep up with digital learning?

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (7.4)" class="box" id="_09_CHAPTER_C07_sec_006" role="complementary">

<figure id="_09_CHAPTER_C07_UFigure_7_7" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF007.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Research what you have tried before in digital learning. Examine it
    carefully.

-   Discover the appetite, skills, knowledge and behaviours that already
    exist around digital technologies.

-   Have coffee with the IT department. A lot.

-   Speak to HR and internal comms to discover what conversation and
    community looks like in your organisation.

-   Use your research and conversations to build a business case and be
    clear on your drivers and your why.

-   Visit a learning technologies trade show and speak to vendors.

-   If possible, hire a fantastic project manager to oversee the
    implementation of any learning tech.

-   If not possible, get yourself on a project management MOOC before
    you invest. The meta learning of experiencing online learning will
    be as useful as the project management skills.

-   Plan an internal marketing campaign for the launch of any digital
    platform. If you have a laggard community, physical giveaways are a
    must. If you have early adopters, share success stories quickly and
    iterate.

</aside>

::: {#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_sec_007 .section .references .bibliography aria-label="THE LIBRARY LIST (7.5)" role="doc-bibliography"}
<figure id="_09_CHAPTER_C07_UFigure_7_8" class="figure">
<p><span id="09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_163" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 163" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF008.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   CIPD (2020) Learning and Skills at Work, *CIPD* \[online\]
    [[www.cipd.co.uk/Images/learning-skills-work-report-1_tcm18-79434.pdf]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.cipd.co.uk/Images/learning-skills-work-report-1_tcm18-79434.pdf)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/V47G-RCPF]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/V47G-RCPF))

-   Daly, J (2019) *Challenging Perceptions*, Towards Maturity, London

-   Hoyle, R (2015) *Informal Learning in Organizations*, Kogan Page,
    London

-   Jarche, H (2010) Learning is (still) conversation,
    [[jarche.com]{.url-hyperlink}](https://jarche.com/) \[online\]
    [[www.jarche.com/2010/02/learning-is-still-conversation/]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.jarche.com/2010/02/learning-is-still-conversation/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/CU2Y-84S8]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/CU2Y-84S8))

-   Paine, N (2014) *The Learning Challenge*, Kogan Page, London

-   Paine, N (2019) *Workplace Learning*, Kogan Page, London

-   Pitlik, D (2018) The Digital Transformation Train Has Left The
    Station, *Netscout* \[online\]
    [[www.netscout.com/blog/digital-transformation-train-has-left-station]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.netscout.com/blog/digital-transformation-train-has-left-station)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/6WH4-XDSG]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/6WH4-XDSG))

-   Taylor, D (2017) *Learning Technologies in the Workplace*, Kogan
    Page, London

-   Timms, P (2020) *The Energized Workplace*, Kogan Page, London

-   Tyas, J (2019) Data-driven learning strategy deep dive from
    Girlguiding and Filtered, *Filtered* \[online\]
    [[www.learn.filtered.com/thoughts/data-learning-strategy-girlguiding-filtered]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.learn.filtered.com/thoughts/data-learning-strategy-girlguiding-filtered)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/7DTC-2FWY]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/7DTC-2FWY))

-   Wheeler, S (2019) *Digital Learning in Organisations*, Kogan Page,
    London
:::

::: {#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_sec_008 .section .endnotes aria-labelledby="_09_CHAPTER_C07_h1_008"}
# Notes {#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_h1_008 .title}

[1](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_1_reference) Bruce
Tuckman's Theory of Group Dynamics suggests that groups pass through
forming, storming and norming to performing. He later also added
adjourning, as knowing when to close groups down is also important.
[[www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newLDR_86.htm]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newLDR_86.htm)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/372G-4NEA]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/372G-4NEA))

[2](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_2_reference)
[Chapter 3](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml), A brief history of learning
technology, in Steve Wheeler's book gives great insight here. Wheeler, S
(2019) *Digital Learning in Organisations* Kogan Page, 2019

[3](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_3_reference) Deborah
Frances-White's 2017 keynote:
[[www.youtube.com/watch?v=-hM6Spx1POU]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-hM6Spx1POU)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/S54L-E9VN]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/S54L-E9VN))

[4](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_4_reference) For
information on how to record a narration over PowerPoint:
[[www.howtogeek.com/449836/how-to-record-voiceover-narration-in-powerpoint/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.howtogeek.com/449836/how-to-record-voiceover-narration-in-powerpoint/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/5G2H-LE37]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/5G2H-LE37))

[]{#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml_page_164 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 164"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[5](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_5_reference)
The concept of sheep-dip learning is to put everyone through the same
treatment, as if people's learning needs are the same. They do the
learning whether they need the learning or not, as is typical for
compliance-based e-learning.

[6](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_6_reference) Video
with poor sound is not a good idea:
[[www.idearocketanimation.com/4616-video-production-blunders-bad-audio/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.idearocketanimation.com/4616-video-production-blunders-bad-audio/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/85LT-FSNE]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/85LT-FSNE))

[7](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_7_reference) The
origin story for Doug Shaw's 'Proceed until apprehended!':
[[www.consultingartist.com/leadership/learning-leadership-lessons/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.consultingartist.com/leadership/learning-leadership-lessons/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/C8X5-2E2Q]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/C8X5-2E2Q))

[8](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_8_reference) Anna
Whitehouse's Flex Appeal:
[[www.motherpukka.co.uk/flex/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.motherpukka.co.uk/flex/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/4GMZ-77QT]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/4GMZ-77QT))

[9](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_9_reference)
Maryvonne Hassall interview on Learning Now TV:
[[www.learningnow.tv/watch/programme-37\-\--30-november-2017/maryvonne-hassall-on-using-ai-at-work.html]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.learningnow.tv/watch/programme-37---30-november-2017/maryvonne-hassall-on-using-ai-at-work.html)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/LMH6-CSGA]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/LMH6-CSGA))

[10](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_10_reference) This
web article from January 2018 suggests that 'If your organization isn't
already knee deep into digital transformation (DX) by now, then you're
the exception and not the rule.' Pitlik, D (2018) The Digital
Transformation Train Has Left The Station, *Netscout* \[online\]
[[www.netscout.com/blog/digital-transformation-train-has-left-station]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.netscout.com/blog/digital-transformation-train-has-left-station)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/6WH4-XDSG]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/6WH4-XDSG))

[11](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml__09_CHAPTER_C07_Endnote_7_11_reference) Tweet
from Donald Clark on podcasts and the value of voice:
[[https://twitter.com/DonaldClark/status/1243845150067040256]{.url-hyperlink}](https://twitter.com/DonaldClark/status/1243845150067040256)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/C3FB-GXB9]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/C3FB-GXB9))
:::

[]{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

<div>

[]{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_165 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 165"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[[08]{.ordinal
.ordinal}](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_10_CHAPTER_C08_sec_001)

# [Blending Learning](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_10_CHAPTER_C08_sec_001) {#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml__10_CHAPTER_C08_h1_001 .title}

How to offer a holistic approach to workplace learning

</div>

<figure id="_10_CHAPTER_C08_UFigure_8_1" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF001.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

The culmination of the first part of this book naturally arrives here
with blended learning, a mix of modalities. Blended, in practical terms,
is a learning offer created of many elements. However, if you think of
blended learning as simply mixing up a learning offer with different
types, you are missing the point. Blending learning is a mindset
approach to L&D. It is an opportunity to break the habitual thinking
that corporate learning equals a course, or proving knowledge or skills
equals a qualification. Although, technically, blended learning can
involve a mixed modality of learning (e.g. digital, face-to-face,
digital), viewing the opportunity only in such terms is the learning
equivalent of a poor feedback sandwich. Using a blending learning
mindset, we can ensure that learning fits the needs of the business more
appropriately; like providing clothes that fit each person, instead of
issuing the same t-shirt to the entire workforce.

We need to be truly open-minded to ensure that we are answering the
business issue that needs to be solved. Blending learning is a practical
skill as well as a way of thinking about learning. However, it's
important for us to not assume that a blended solution is what is
needed, in the same way that we should not assume that 100 per cent
digital or face-to-face is needed. With these fixed mindsets, you won't
be open to other options, and it will be easy to end up with the wrong
learning offer. Rather, first consider the business problem and the
learners, and then find the best way to support
[]{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_166 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 166"
role="doc-pagebreak"}their needs. The answer will rarely be just one
injection of learning -- one e-learning programme, one workshop, one job
aid, and so on. I call this 'injection education', and it is not a magic
cure-all for learning. At the very least, adding reflective practice or
engaging manager support for embedding learning is something beyond any
one intervention. With blending as a mindset, you will consider more
than one learning option for all the issues to be solved. Consider the
mindset you have. Be honest with yourself. Do you have a fixed course
mentality?

Adopting a more open mindset to learning may be a challenge for some,
due to the legacy of 'solutioneering' within L&D. We love to jump in
with answers. And we are often caught up in the zeitgeist of the next
shiny toy. 'I think we hold onto things too long, but then press delete
too quickly.' suggests David D'Souza in his blog *101 Half Connected
Things* in a discussion on 'Classroom Learning'. I agree with this
sentiment: we must blend the right mix of solutions to benefit learners.
Sometimes that will be classroom-based. Sometimes not. As learning
professionals, we should not be advocates of any one type of learning.
This is not a two-sided coin of classroom or not classroom. Rather it is
a multifaceted dice -- we must be advocates of the right solution, for
the right problem, for the right people, at the right time, for the
right reasons, delivered in the right way.

The reality is that we all learn through a mix of formal, informal and
social means. The makeup of the mix varies from person to person,
organisation to organisation, problem to problem... But miss out one of
those three elements and you don't really have a blended programme, or
not a holistic one at any rate. It could be that a very simple blend is
required, such as a preparatory video, formal course, reflection and
self-directed homework; such blends can be a starting position, but you
don't want a formulaic answer.

Our purpose in learning is to support our businesses and our colleagues.
To do that we need to create something which unlocks workforce
capabilities. The CIPD *Learning & Skills at Work* report (2020), for
example, talks of prioritise, digitise, socialise and humanise. These
are great words for a holistic approach. With the business problem and
needs of learners clear, we also consider whether the business is ready
and set up for a multimodal learning offer. [Chapter
10](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml) invites you to consider the appropriate
environment, permission and culture for learning to be effective. It is
vital that you and your organisation empower people and enable them to
follow the learning path they need to follow.

Blending learning requires trust. When you are not putting people in a
classroom, how can you 'see' they are learning? The whole trust piece
will []{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_167 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 167"
role="doc-pagebreak"}really help us to properly blend learning, rather
than taking a digital--face-to-face--digital approach, or wrapping
social learning around formal learning. When we trust people to learn
formally, informally and socially, we need to look for the results of
successful blended learning in different places than we looked before.
Blended learning doesn't sit on evaluation happy sheets, nor does it pop
up on an annual revenue compliance tick boxes. Like learning culture, it
is more ethereal and harder to hold. We need to consider 'seeing' the
results of a great blend in things like employee engagement scores,
customer service scores, or how 'light' or 'heavy' an office feels when
people are free to learn when and where they need to. Blending learning
is an ecosystem, an almost living entity within in your organisation, a
way of being for colleagues and their thinking about learning. For a
picture of this living learning, see [Figure
11.5](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_5) in [Chapter
11](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml). Blending learning is personal, ongoing,
effective, holistic -- the epitome of a true learning culture.

<figure id="_10_CHAPTER_C08_UFigure_8_2" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF002.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

[The Whole
100](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_10_CHAPTER_C08_h3_001)

So far in this book, L&D has been encouraged to research in order to
build up a picture of our organisations, our learners and their learning
needs and expectations of L&D. We have started to look at learning
solutions in social and digital learning, and now we will look at what I
call 'The Whole 100' of learning -- a genuine and true blend. We need to
consider 100 per cent of options available to provide the best learning
solutions.

In this chapter, we will look at preparing ourselves and our
organisations for blended learning, then consider the importance of
language, before moving on to look practically at how we can blend a
seamless flow of integrated learning in a transition from face-to-face
to blending learning for a whole-person holistic approach we can
measure.

The crossover between formal and informal learning was already blurred
before 2020, but as the year unfolded the lines merged even more. What
seems increasingly evident is that it is unacceptable for people to have
to wait for learning in order to do their job better. It's also
increasingly unacceptable for formal learning to be the only option
available. People will []{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_168 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 168" role="doc-pagebreak"}not, no, cannot wait. As
learning professionals, we cannot override the fact that digital has
become as normalised in organisations as it is in our private lives.

Yet there has long been a belief that L&D operates only in formal
learning spaces, separately to informal and social spaces, and even
further removed from self-directed learning. By not operating in all the
learning spaces, we are limiting our chances for success. A blend must
not be considered in any formulaic way, but rather be personalised and
relevant. Rather than one form of learning being in competition with
another, we need to embrace all the learning spaces and a variety of
learning solutions. We need to make room for everything and embrace the
benefits it all brings -- the multifaceted dice is a real opportunity.

Thus, we have 'the Whole 100' to play with when it comes to building
learning. A whole kit bag of opportunity to create the right solution,
for the right problem, for the right people, at the right time, for the
right reasons, delivered in the right way.

[Mindset
matters](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_10_CHAPTER_C08_h3_002)

The Whole 100 in the last section is a respectful nod to the 70:20:10
reference model, which is a mindset of thinking about performance that
suggests '10% of learning is formal, 70% comes from working, and 20% is
gained from others' (Arets *et al*, 2015, p1).

The numbers here are quite redundant as percentages will be different
for different contexts. However, the principle of learning not being
simply formal is a useful starting point. In a discussion with Charles
Jennings when I was researching this book, he was keen for 70:20:10 not
to be associated with blended learning, as 70:20:10 is absolutely not a
simple formula for blended learning, as is mistakenly so often
thought[]{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml__10_CHAPTER_C08_Endnote_8_1_reference
.anchor}^[1](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml__10_CHAPTER_C08_Endnote_8_1)^. I
totally agree, and respect his perspective. 70:20:10 as a mindset
approach to performance is so much more, indeed it is a 'movement which
uses the power of collective thinking to improve and innovate' (Arets
*et al*, 2015).

So why mention it here in a chapter on blended learning? Not to annoy
Charles Jennings, that is for sure, as I respect his work. I mention it
here because building learning solutions of any kind starts with us. In
order to be successful, we first need to consider ourselves and what we
bring. The mindset approach of 70:20:10 advocated by Arets *et al*
reminds us to consider both the role we play in learning and the variety
of learning going on in our organisations.

[]{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_169 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 169"
role="doc-pagebreak"}The 70:20:10 Institute suggests we consider the
roles we have in L&D, and suggests six performance-focused roles, such
as Performance Detective and Performance Game Changer, to name just a
couple[]{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml__10_CHAPTER_C08_Endnote_8_2_reference
.anchor}^[2](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml__10_CHAPTER_C08_Endnote_8_2)^. We
need to think differently about ourselves and the work we do; this is
the start of the mindset shift. Building practical skills within this
mindset, as outlined by the performance-focused roles suggested,
provides a useful future view for L&D. Are we ready to do things
differently in learning? Are we prepared to consider learning and
performance?

It starts with us, and continues within our organisations. Are they
ready for a different approach? When it comes to 70:20:10, do our
organisations really miss the point and use the approach to slash
budgets to 10 per cent because that's where L&D operate? Or do they
realise we need to embrace less formal elements of learning to improve
performance? We talk in Part 2 about how we can make can that happen.

We need a shift in mindset to embrace all that is on offer with The
Whole 100. On a basic level, the phrase reminds us we have a lot in our
kit bag to build from, but let's not forget that kit bag starts with our
own mindset.

[Willingness to
change](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_10_CHAPTER_C08_h3_003)

The argument that a lot of people use for sticking with face-to-face is
that people want it: line managers say people want the classroom and
learners say they want the classroom. But what is it that they really
want? Is it that they fear change? Is it just to get away from their
desks, have some nice biscuits and coffee, a good lunch and a chat to
colleagues, plus the time to think?

The roots of classroom-based learning for work go back a long way, to
when people were moving out of the fields and into factories. At that
time, learning was delivered by one person, with one book. They had the
knowledge and they shared it. Sound familiar? Workplace learning has
mirrored classroom-based learning ever since, even though we have
realised it isn't the most effective way for people to learn.

The CIPD *Learning and Skills at Work* report states that 'face-to-face
delivery is still dominant' (CIPD, 2020, p19). There is no doubt that
in-person learning can be part of the mix; it should be, if only for the
networking benefits alone. Yet it can be frustrating waiting for a
course, perhaps not being able to get on with jobs whilst waiting.
Perhaps this is why the same report notes that:

> []{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_170 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 170"
> role="doc-pagebreak"}On-the-job training remains the most popular
> method. The most commonly reported learning and development method was
> on-the-job training -- used in the last 12 months by 61% of
> organisations... This was followed closely by online learning, used by
> 57% of organisations. The popularity of online learning and
> development methods has increased since the survey was last conducted
> in 2015. (CIPD, 2020, p21)

People do not actually wait for a course. They learn whilst doing. If
you are not offering anything to support on-the-job learning, such as
job aids, learning buddies, or videos of systems or machinery, your
learners are in a happenchance lottery of learning of asking the people
around them. This is not good enough to meet the demands of modern
business. Other departments don't rely on happenchance, and neither
should we. This is where better learning is needed, to give better
options and eliminate risk.

But what if our learners are not willing? What if they demand
face-to-face? This is when L&D needs to focus on a communications effort
in order to win hearts and minds. Never underestimate people's
willingness to change if you can show them why. Share the evidence you
have gathered as part of the process of reading the early chapters of
this book. Dig into the reasons why they like face-to-face -- is it the
learning? Or the socialising? The day away from the daily grind? Or does
it buy them time to think? Whatever the reason, I reiterate I do not
advocate for getting rid of face-to-face, rather I advocate for calling
a spade a spade. If face-to-face is for socialising, then build social
learning elements into your blend -- perhaps in a community of practice.
What we mustn't do is assume. Always find out why and work with the
evidence. Senior leadership teams are generally easy to get on board if
you show them the evidence.

In my experience, the willingness to change may be present in the body
of our organisations before it is with us in L&D. Do we sometimes allow
our presumptions to hold us back in L&D? Are we the ones who are
actually holding onto the past because we wrongly assume people aren't
willing to change? Is it actually L&Ders who still think it's all about
face-to-face delivery? Perhaps it's the fear factor holding us back from
offering anything else. What if we fail? Or perhaps it's not knowing
where to start. Is it easier to hold on to the belief that face-to-face
is best because that is what we know?

One of the conclusions of the CIPD *Learning and Skills at Work* report
was the need to upskill L&Ders, noting 'Traditional roles dominate the
L&D function' (CIPD, 2020, p16). It is just not good enough for L&D not
[]{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_171 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 171"
role="doc-pagebreak"}to walk the talk and consistently upskill
ourselves. We cannot be the 'cobbler's children' and continue to neglect
our own skills. We must be willing to change.

[Shifting L&D
skills](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_10_CHAPTER_C08_h3_004)

If your organisation has only ever offered face-to-face training, how do
you broaden out? Your starting point when it comes to blending your
learning is the L&Ders in your organisation. Do the people responsible
for learning actually have the skills they need in order to blend?

Part of the challenge for L&D in creating effective learning blends is a
skills gap. We may want to incorporate digital learning assets, or add
in webinars or infographics, but these are all skills beyond a
traditional L&Der. The CIPD *Learning and Skills at Work* report shows:

> The most commonly reported roles in learning and development functions
> are administrator (reported by 49% of respondents), head of L&D/L&D
> manager (48%), and face-to-face trainer/facilitator (46%). ... On the
> other hand, design roles, such as learning technologist/product owner
> (12%), digital asset creator (7%), and instructional designers (11%)
> -- who create, curate, design and support digital learning experiences
> -- are reported by a minority of survey respondents. (CIPD, 2020,
> pp16-17)

This has been the same for many a year, as shown in successive Towards
Maturity annual benchmark reports. Consider the people involved in your
situation; there should be no judgement involved in them not having the
required skills -- we all start somewhere.

To enable L&Ders to invest in others, we may need to invest in
ourselves. I suggest you start with a skills audit. For support around
knowing skills and skillsets, there are several places you can go. The
Emerald Works Health Check (formerly the benchmark Towards Maturity
Index) enables you to have a look at your in-house provision and
benchmark yourself against your sector. You could go to the CIPD's
profession map and assess yourselves against it. You could follow up
with some of the CIPD's assessment tools in order to identify any L&D
skills gaps. You could also go to the LPI (Learning & Performance
Institute) Capability Map. It's important to identify and address skills
issues.

[]{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_172 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 172"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[The importance of
language](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_10_CHAPTER_C08_h3_005)

Once L&D is ready both in mindset and skills for the shift, we need to
get our organisations on board too. In my experience, one important
element that needs addressing is the language of learning. People don't
know what blended learning means, nor do they care. L&D talks in riddles
for many people in the organisation. Talk the language of your business
(see [Chapter 2](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml)). Don't get too caught out with
the terminology around learning. Is it training? Or learning? Or
blending learning? Or virtual classroom or a webcast? Is it learning and
development or learning and performance?

It is important that you have a common understanding within your
organisation with whomever you are talking to about this thing called
learning or people development or performance. If you ask colleagues
'What is learning and development?' and their answer is 'Going on a
three-day course out of the office', then at least you know where you
stand. The default setting should not be the course, but if it is, you
need to think about language you use to introduce the concept of a
blended approach, otherwise the message could fall flat. You may need to
consider a rebrand and some internal marketing, explaining to people the
value of a continuous learning ethos. You will probably have to also
accept the fact that it will be harder for you to move towards blended
L&D in a course-focused culture. Go at the pace of the organisation, or
consider a rebranding revolution (see [Chapter
12](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml)).

[Branding](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_10_CHAPTER_C08_h3_006)

If you are in a language-barriered or traditional learning culture
situation, speak to Marketing, because, for you, the first and most
important part of the blended journey is rebranding. If you are in a
small organisation and don't have a marketing team, then find a
marketing agency or follow people who are offering free marketing
support on LinkedIn, Twitter or Instagram. You will need to reset the
hearts and minds within your organisation about what L&D is and what it
can offer. If people are expecting learning to be handed to them and you
offer them a part self-directed, part online, part in-person programme,
you are setting yourself up to fail. People won't understand the value.
As already noted, blending learning is about the right solution, for the
right problem, for the right people, at the right time, for the right
reasons, delivered in the right way -- and that is very rarely a course.
However, if people haven't been on a course, they may feel they have not
had any learning. This approach needs a rebrand so you are not seemingly
[]{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_173 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 173"
role="doc-pagebreak"}taking away investment in people by taking away
courses, or are seen to be adding to workloads by asking people to watch
a video before a course and talk about the learning afterwards with
colleagues. If you talk about better learning outcomes with a blend,
people will not care. They have no frame of reference. You need to put
it to them in a way they can understand. At Santa Fe Group, when we
launched a blended offer including a new online academy, we used the
phrase 'Learn Share Grow' as an action slogan to give us a common
language to describe what L&D was about. We set up a teaser campaign for
the platform launch following all the classic cues of marketing
campaigns, including free puzzles and senior sponsor's videos. It
created a buzz and helped people understand there was a shift in
language and in the learning offer. Reframing thinking about learning
may be your first step to blending learning.

[Trainers or
facilitators?](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_10_CHAPTER_C08_h3_007)

It is not purely a question of semantics when we consider the language
of L&D. It is hugely important to ensure everyone buys in. The people
who have traditionally delivered face-to-face training are known as
trainers. In recent years, that term seems to be less fashionable in
some circles. I have seen trainers rebranded as facilitators. But did
they become facilitators, in the true sense, or did they continue as
before but under a new name?

Trainers are important. They teach skills, and check that the skills
have been understood. Typically, a trainer's role is to infuse learners
with their knowledge. Wrapped up in this knowledge transfer is
personality and status -- the trainer knows everything and people attend
training as willing, grateful recipients of the knowledge bestowed upon
them. This dynamic is not quite true, of course, but this is the history
and thus can be the expectation. Even the best, most experienced
trainers know that people in the room could have equal or better
knowledge to share. Learners are rarely a blank canvas.

A facilitator operates in a different way to a trainer. It's a different
role, a different mindset, and requires a different set of skills and
approaches. The International Association of Facilitators talk about a
formula based around content and process. Sharing content (knowledge or
skills) is training. Supporting a shift in behaviours is facilitation --
holding the space for people to move themselves towards something new.

In our blended learning, I respect both roles but I believe we need to
make a shift from trainer to facilitator, both in the language and the
skills. We []{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_174 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 174" role="doc-pagebreak"}need to help learners to move
away from being spoon-fed information to awaken their own curiosity for
learning. A move towards a facilitative approach helps those leading
learning to unlock potential within individuals and teams, to encourage,
help, influence and inspire, as well as teach content.

We don't want 9 out of 10 on a happy sheet because 'the trainer was fun,
interesting and told some great anecdotes'. We want 9 out of 10 on the
happy sheet because 'the trainer made me think', because 'the trainer
made me work outside of my comfort zone', because 'this element of
learning is going to really help me with this problem I've been
experiencing in my job'. These are all skills that can be unlocked
through facilitation.

[Working with subject matter
experts](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_10_CHAPTER_C08_h3_008)

In building great blends, you can offer more voices to your learning,
particularly expert voices. Given what we have just seen as a shift from
training to facilitating, our experts cannot be encouraged to just talk
at people. Consequently, L&Ders will find our role moving towards one of
helping subject matter experts (SMEs) to share their knowledge in a more
appropriate, sense-making way. We need to understand coaching and
facilitation, as well as good learning design, to support our experts to
share their knowledge well. Whether it is guiding someone on how to run
an engaging lunch and learn, or interviewing knowledge experts for a
video on your LMS, for many of us in L&D our practice will encompass
skills transfer, shifting behaviours and challenging norms. We are the
subject matter experts in learning, so we need to support and hold space
for our SMEs to thrive.

What does 'holding space' actually mean; what does it look like? There
is a logistics piece involved in making available physical (or virtual)
opportunities for good conversations. This is more than a chat by the
water cooler. It is those lunch and learn spaces, or private meeting
spaces, or encouragement to go out for a walk or to a coffee shop. These
are all types of holding space.

More intimately, but equally as practically, holding space utilises the
skills of a facilitator to respect all, build trust and provide safe
spaces, acknowledge conflicts of interest fairly, set aside personal
bias, and ensure equity of all voices. The IAF Code of Conduct talks
also about being a steward of the process, which essentially means not
getting in the way of the
work[]{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml__10_CHAPTER_C08_Endnote_8_3_reference
.anchor}^[3](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml__10_CHAPTER_C08_Endnote_8_3)^. So
much of this starts with us and our ability to have the vision,
creativity and drive to create effective, efficient, engaging and
enjoyable []{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_175 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 175" role="doc-pagebreak"}learning experiences for our
organisations, then translating that vision in to action.

[Practical ways to move towards a
blend](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_10_CHAPTER_C08_h3_009)

Whilst blending learning is a mindset shift manifesting a continuous
learning culture in an organisation, at a practical level it is a method
for developing learning solutions. We will see with the frameworks in
the next part of the book that there are some fundamentals to consider
before you get to a learning solution but, once addressed, developing a
blended learning programme is an energising experience.

In this section, I am keen to show you ways in which you can gently move
away from pure classroom-based learning to incorporate new thinking.
This is not a formula for blended learning (that does not exist), rather
just a few practical examples you might like to consider trying.

**Determining the type of learning** in the blend is the first job. Of
course, expected learning outcomes will be the main guide, but I also
like to find out what is in your learning kit bag to blend with. There
are two ways to look at this; first, look at what is available in your
setting, and second, what do our learners want or expect? The first is a
simple audit of options -- what technology, what time, what budget, what
skills, what permission (see [Chapter 10](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml)). These
are the structural elements. The second focuses on learners. You can
find out in a few moments with a group of your learners and some Post-it
notes (or an online whiteboard can also work). Give everyone a Post-it
pad and pen, and ask them for one minute to write down all the ways they
learn anything in their lives, work or personal, writing one idea per
Post-it. After a minute, get everyone to stick their Post-it notes on a
blank wall, grouping them into similar categories. These lists are your
kit bag. The types of categories you will see emerge tend to be printed
materials (newspapers, books, magazine, journals), online materials
(blogs, online newspapers, websites), visual media (videos, art,
infographics), aural media (podcasts, music, presentations), and more. I
use this technique to start co-creating learning design with a new
cohort. By knowing the types of learning chosen by them, we can provide
the variety needed for everyone to engage with their learning.

**Flipping the classroom** is a comforting place to start a more
systemic transitioning from face-to-face. Flipping the classroom is
quite a simple premise: with the flipped classroom model, the knowledge
transfer happens before people get together in a room, rather than when
they are in the room. []{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_176 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 176" role="doc-pagebreak"}That knowledge transfer may
take place from a book, a video or an e-learning programme, through a
preparatory conversation or webinar, or in some other way. What happens
in the classroom is that participants get to make sense of their
self-directed learning by asking questions, through group discussion and
debates. The generic and potentially abstract know­ledge transfer
learning done prior to the session is synthesised to their own context
in the classroom -- sometimes known as 'landing the learning'. A great
facilitator knows how to help individuals in a room unlock their
potential to really make sense of and move on the learning that took
place outside of the classroom.

**Induction** is a necessary starting place for a blend, as a new hire
is usually still working out their notice with a former organisation, so
you cannot possibly send them on a course. Before someone enters an
organisation for the first time, you can send them materials to learn
about their new employer. You can provide a welcome video, an
organisation chart, some light reading materials, a welcome package of
goodies. All of these are useful and make the new joiner feel special
and excited. Consider how new starters immerse themselves in this new
place? How do they get to grips with the culture and the language of the
organisation? Even if all L&D provides is a simple list of words or
acronyms used in the organisation, this can be really useful for people
trying to navigate their way in a new environment.

**Networking** is often held up as the reason people like classroom
learning. One of the challenges around moving towards a blend is
managing the impact on networking opportunities. Training in a classroom
situation encourages networking, and I hear criticism that this can't be
replicated in an online space. Post Covid-19, we may all have a
different opinion on that view, given it is the only option we have had
for some time. I believe you can network very effectively online. It is
all about noticing people, just as it is in person. People leave a wake
online, be that on social media, live online events, forums, or in their
blogs and photos. If we look out for the clues, we can notice people --
are they posting a lot and suddenly stop? Are they using positive or
negative language? Are they erratic or regular posters? Are they sharers
or creators? Or are they simply not present? All these things tell a
story. Notice people online, just as you do in person. When we
facilitate in a live webinar, for example, have an attendee name list to
privately check in with those voices you don't hear in the chat or
activities. When you care about people, you make deep-rooted
connections, online or offline.

Undoubtedly, networking in person is valuable. But if this is why you
are providing classroom learning, don't; or at least, don't call it
learning. Call it []{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_177 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 177" role="doc-pagebreak"}what it is: networking. You
need to be honest about what it is that you are trying to achieve with
live events. Is it learning or networking? Or both? And how and where is
the learning happening? The value of the classroom does not always come
from learning from the sage on the stage, but from learning from each
other, as well as the overall experience. Sometimes people need to be
pulled away from their day-to-day work in order to do their learning.
Blended learning can create opportunities for networking to cross over
both offline and online spaces, creating ongoing learning discussions
and deeper connections between people. When you offer physical
networking space, also consider options for encouraging the ongoing
mutual support of learning together.

**Unconference or Open Space** events are fantastic ways to facilitate
networking and social learning. I highly recommend them. They are very
loosely structured, have no agenda, and rely on what people bring to
inspire and teach people, sending them on their way with
thought-provoking reflections. They follow the principle of four rules,
two roles and one law, explained by Unconference aficionado Kev Wyke:

-   The rules -- whoever comes are the right people, whatever happens is
    the only thing that could happen, when it starts it starts, and when
    it's over it's over.

-   The roles -- 'bumblebees', who jump around conversations and
    pollinate them, and 'butterflies', who flutter around the outside of
    the conversations, not joining in but capturing what is going on
    outside and linking them together.

-   The law -- of two feet: if you are not learning nor contributing,
    move to a different conversation (Wyke, 2014).

**Getting outside** is a great addition to the learning mix. You could
try Street Wisdom, started by David Pearl, with events now held around
the world and online. The premise is to go for a walk. However, an
insightful structure is applied to how you walk around a physical space
in order to seek answers to questions. This helps you to open up your
mind to seeing answers you might otherwise have missed. It can be a very
powerful learning opportunity. You might do this on your own, but could
walk together with others to make sense of what you are seeing with
them.

<aside aria-label="EXAMPLE (8.1)" class="example" epub:type="practice" id="_10_CHAPTER_C08_sec_002" role="complementary">

[]{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_178 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 178"
role="doc-pagebreak"}EXAMPLE

Why does blending work? Let's take a look at first aid at work training.
Typically, this involves a classroom with a first aid expert who teaches
the practical skills. That's a really useful learning solution, but it's
not the only solution available to us. Nor is it always the easiest one
for people to remember, because there is too much to take in at once.
Your memory of the training may be how exhausting it was to do chest
compressions. Muscle memory is useful in a physical set up. But when you
need to do them in real life, under pressure, will you remember? The
training environment is an unrealistic situation with little resemblance
to a real-life situation.

In addition to the advantages of the physical learning experience,
effective first aid at work learning could involve people experiencing
the emotions they might feel in a real-life situation. Those emotions
might be anxiety about performing under pressure, for example. Because
of technology, we don't have to be in a classroom to simulate these.
There is a fantastic branched video from the Resuscitation Council
UK[]{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml__10_CHAPTER_C08_Endnote_8_4_reference
.anchor}^[4](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml__10_CHAPTER_C08_Endnote_8_4)^ that
can help provoke different emotional responses. You watch somebody
collapse and you choose what action to take. If your actions are the
wrong ones, sadly, you watch that person (actor) die. Video is brilliant
for evoking an emotional response, for engaging learners, and helping
them realise how they might behave under pressure, yet all in a safe,
structured environment.

It's the same for Virtual Reality -- I can still recall my first time in
VR when I picked the wrong fire extinguisher and blew up the simulated
room I was in; it was most certainly an emotional response. But if you
were to do this in a classroom, perhaps with someone faking a collapse
in front of everyone, then that could be traumatic and highly
inappropriate. VR is perfect for this. Hold onto my mantra of the right
solution, for the right problem, for the right people, at the right
time, for the right reasons, delivered in the right way.

</aside>

[Whole-person
learning](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_10_CHAPTER_C08_h3_010)

What truly effective blends support in the workplace is a more of a
whole-person approach to learning. This is about taking a holistic
approach to how people learn for work. Previously, we may have
considered just teaching what people needed for their job, but
whole-person learning plays into a variety of different approaches.
First, that any learning is good learning. For example, a lot of
workplaces support people to pursue hobbies or wider
[]{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_179 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 179"
role="doc-pagebreak"}interests, giving staff a small financial
contribution to spend as they like, such as playing a musical
instrument, learning a language, or cookery lessons. We can bring these
into the workplace. For example, if someone takes on music lessons,
perhaps encourage them to write a song as reflective practice for
workplace learning.

Hobbies are learning we choose to do in our own time -- how people learn
to do them willingly is golden data for L&D. Follow up on where the
funding is spent, as it surfaces ways in which people are willing to
learn. And if they are not spending it, that tells you a different
story. Do they not value learning? Are their line managers not
encouraging it? Do they not know about it? By following how and why
people are learning in their free time, you gain an understanding of the
sorts of learning preferences they have. Note the use of the plural
here: people may prefer to learn in a particular way in one instance,
but a different way in another. It's important for us to always bear in
mind that learning preferences aren't fixed, so our learning offer
should not always be the same. One advantage of a blend of learning is
the ability to bring so many different types of learning offer to your
learners. You could consider doing some testing to see what's popular
and what's not; for example, by putting the same learning out in a
variety of different types and seeing what people opt for and which
aspects of the learning they engage with. That might tell you whether
people prefer podcasts or webinars, books or videos, and so on. You can
use this data to offer a more whole-person learning approach, giving
individuals what they need to do a better job at work, whatever that
might be.

[Blends we can
measure](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_10_CHAPTER_C08_h3_011)

When we open our mindset towards blending learning, we must also be
open-minded about learning measurement. Although it may be easier to
measure e-learning completion rates, for example, and be more complex to
measure the value and impact of social learning activities, the easier
measurement doesn't make that element of the blend more accurate or
appropriate. As we are solving business problems with L&D, the business
data connected to those problems -- e.g. attrition, productivity,
employee engagement scores -- should be used as a starting position for
our measurement. Measuring these again after any learning programme can
demonstrate both any progress on business goals, as well as the
effectiveness and value of our learning solutions.

Of course, there will always be additional factors unrelated to learning
that may influence changes to business metrics, such as an upswing or
downturn []{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_180 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 180" role="doc-pagebreak"}in national economies,
crucial staff leaving or joining a business, the loss or gain of a big
customer. These factors skew data, so to build a more complete picture
of how effective our learning offer is it is imperative that we measure
at each element of the blend. By making measurement methods short and
using the same measurements across a whole programme, comparable data
can be gathered: the specific techniques used -- e.g. pulse survey,
post-learning questions, test scores -- will depend on what is being
taught. Comparing data tracking progress across the blend gives useful
information on what types of learning activities work for your learners
and will build the story of the part L&D plays in business improvements.
Regularly collecting data is especially useful for building up a
longitudinal study bigger picture of cause and effect on impact and
outcomes.

The need to focus on blended learning solutions that can be measured is
effectively summarised by the CIPD *Learning and Skills at Work* 2020
report: 'Organisations still face challenges in demonstrating the impact
of learning and development; without being able to measure learning
impact, valuable time and resources are wasted' (CIPD, 2020, p7).

Taking the easy route because you can measure it, or not measuring
learning outcomes and impact, are a waste. Measurement takes thinking
and planning. It is easy to offer one kind of learning and make everyone
go through the same programme. But if you take this easy path, you will
make it a hard path for some of your learners. If you give people
choice, then they can pick up and choose the learning that suits them,
at a time that suits them, which will undoubtedly mean that your
learning is more likely to land and with a greater number of people.
That is what you need to aim for, *and* you need to be able to show
value for it, especially as it will be more impactful.

<aside aria-label="Case-Study (8.2)" class="case-study" epub:type="case-study" id="_10_CHAPTER_C08_sec_003" role="complementary">

<figure id="_10_CHAPTER_C08_UFigure_8_3" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF003.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

This is a perfect case study to end this part of the book, as it happens
to reflect the content of the chapters so far, from a clear
understanding of strategic intent to []{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_181
.pagebreak aria-label="Page 181" role="doc-pagebreak"}successful
programme launch. It was an absolute pleasure working with The OCM Group
on their project to bring the first digital coaching qualification to
fruition. CEO Ed Parsloe taught me the value of taking the time to do
really good thinking before even taking the first step. Ed was suitably
ambitious, but grounded in very sound reasoning. Coaching qualifications
have traditionally been a face-to-face learning offer. How could
something so people focused be taught digitally? This was the problem we
got together to solve, and this is a story of the translation of
strategy into action to create ELECTRIC
Online^®^.[]{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml__10_CHAPTER_C08_Endnote_8_5_reference
.anchor}^[5](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml__10_CHAPTER_C08_Endnote_8_5)^

**THE OCM'S ELECTRIC ONLINE® PROGRAMME**

**by Ed Parsloe**

We have a history of being innovative here at The OCM. We are a founder
member of the European Mentoring Coaching Council (EMCC), and the first
to provide professional and academically accredited coaching, mentoring
and supervision qualifications. We've now delivered coach-mentoring
qualifications and training to over 12,000 people. We recognise the
impact that people have on the achievement of strategic business
objectives. When my father started the business, he was keen to bring
quality coaching to all. To follow that line of thinking, I'd been
mulling over taking coaching online for some time. Digital was all
around us, and I felt coaching was getting a little behind. I had a
vision of changing organisational culture by enabling line managers to
use coaching skills every day at work and in their daily lives, but I
needed to do this at scale and to a high standard. In response to this
we had already developed a successful light-touch yet robust
qualification, ELECTRIC Coaching®, based on our own coaching model. But
taking that out of the classroom? I didn't know where to start. I had
seen some online content, but the quality was generally poor and never a
full course or qualification. Could it be done? I was determined it
could be; I just didn't know how.

In order to sense check we were going in the right direction, I started
talking to some of our stakeholders. The OCM is a founder member of the
EMCC. All our qualifications are accredited by them. As our most senior
stakeholder, it was imperative in a switch to digital that we had their
support.

Another set of stakeholders we absolutely needed to engage with were our
customers. Would they see the benefits of an online option? Did they
value the face-to-face too much? Would they see online as a lesser
quality option? We had so many questions, we needed to speak to them.

A final group that I needed to bring with me on this journey were the
OCM team themselves. We have been in business for over 20 years, set up
for executive coaching and delivering coaching qualifications in person.
My team had skills in coaching, training, events management, customer
services, account management -- all useful in our business -- but no
skills in digital learning. Could we pull this off?

[]{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_182 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 182"
role="doc-pagebreak"}I knew I needed to get all these stakeholder groups
to come on this journey with us. However, I didn't want to go out to any
of them without a clear way forward. Something so radical needed a clear
vision and plan to enable people to feel the energy and excitement I was
feeling about the possibilities of digital coaching qualifications. So,
despite my excitement, I held off a little and gathered more information
first.

I met Michelle at the CIPD L&D Advisory Group where we were both
members. Impressed by her enthusiasm for online learning, we chatted
about my idea. Michelle was quickly convinced and also excited by the
possibilities. I knew we didn't have the skills in house, so I was keen
to hear from Michelle how we could make this happen. In preparation for
providing this, Michelle asked a lot of questions and shared her ideas.
This set me thinking again. It was some months before I got back to
Michelle. I needed to be sure I had answers to all her questions --
questions like how would we know we had been successful, how much are we
prepared to risk as an investment, how will we ensure integrity of the
qualification. Good thinking questions.

To kick the project off, Michelle advised an internal stakeholder
meeting with all the key people in from the beginning. By this time, I
had shared the vision internally and there was much wonderment. We met
at our offices and Michelle explained about all the different things to
think about in the switch to online. She asked more challenging
questions, but having everyone together we could consider the project
from a variety of angles right from day one. Although I'd been thinking
about this idea for a long time, to hear it replayed through the eyes of
my operational team was useful for crystallising how we move forward.

We decided on converting one of our most successful face-to-face courses
to a digital blend, utilising online animations and e-learning,
self-paced practice activities, video-based learning examples, all
supported by a personal coach-mentor supervisor tutor. It was truly a
blended approach to ensure the right tools provided the right learning
at the right time in the programme. Initially, I had imagined a
programme that was 100 per cent online without any human intervention, a
bit like a MOOC. But with all the questions, thinking and discussions
with stakeholders, we knew the leap to a 100 per cent digital offer
wasn't the right fit for this project. We could achieve a better result
for our learners if there was still a human somewhere in the mix.

So we finally had our vision. Our next step was to share it with our
wider key stakeholders. We wanted to sense check our ideas and gain
their input and approval. We spoke to the EMCC because we needed them
onboard for success. We asked good questions around the skills and
competencies we needed to develop to ensure we would be able to meet
their rigorous standards and get the programme accredited. We had to be
very focused with our success measures, our competitive advantage, and
that we were operating within EMCC frameworks.

[]{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_183 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 183"
role="doc-pagebreak"}To ensure we kept on track, Michelle provided us
with a project manager. It was our first time working with one, and I
now would not underestimate the value of a good project manager. She
helped us to systematically work through all the key elements, from
consulting with our platform provider, to creating e-learning, to
putting the whole package together. Having someone to help us focus on
the right work at the right time kept the project moving and helped us
be cost effective, for example, with hiring film crews for filming
schedules.

It was a big risk to take something so traditionally face-to-face into
the digital space. As coaching is a practical skill, most good coaching
qualifications provide plenty of opportunities to practice and get
feedback from qualified professionals. Initially, it was hard for us to
imagine how we might consider doing this online, to scale, and in a
commercially viable way.

The success or failure of ELECTRIC Online® depended on the platform
provider. We already had a platform for supporting learning transfer and
collecting submissions of portfolios, but this was another level. We
looked at the digital learning market as we wanted to be sure to launch
with the right partner. With such a sea change, it was comforting to
know our current provider fitted well. Our teams knew their way around
the platform we had, so we didn't have to learn a new system too.

We launched and had a blend of options for our customers. We are now
digitising other qualifications. We used the pioneer ELECTRIC Online® as
a model, as we'd learnt some lessons along the way. Our pilot cohort
taught us so much. We took their feedback and we reiterated. As each
piece of the programme was an individual part of the pathway, it was
possible to recreate the blend a little differently to meet specific
organisational needs; perfect for supporting culture change as I'd
originally envisaged.

From concept to product it took us a while to get to launch because we
needed to be sure of the right blend for us. We did a lot of good
thinking. However, we motored along when we brought in Michelle's
experience. She gave us a framework and clarity of steps for success.

**The Case Study Reflections**

*As you read through Ed's account you may have noticed how it mirrors
the chapters so far in this book. This is not very surprising, given
that Ed and I worked together on this project almost from inception.
Here are my reflections for your consideration, having thought of your
own:*

-   *Whilst I recommend engaging stakeholders early on, the decision to
    limit stakeholder engagement until Ed was really and truly ready to
    share the vision was a sensible decision. Getting people on board is
    easier when you have clarity of vision to get them excited. Had Ed
    gone too early with a vague suggestion, it could have put doubt in
    minds. Ed is a big thinker, then a big doer. I admire this.*

-   []{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_184 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 184"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}*Using a programme The OCM already had worked
    well for this project in several ways. They didn't have to create a
    load of content; they had to repurpose it to a different medium. By
    working in a new methodology with content they already knew, it
    didn't feel like such a difficult leap. It was almost a comforting
    shift in approach.*

-   *Using an existing programme allowed The OCM to have a comparative
    measure for success. They could put the online version and in-person
    version side by side and see customer responses and both sets of
    successes and weaknesses. This offered improvement opportunities to
    both products.*

-   *The risk was much lower when all the prep work had been done. The
    actual work to bring a successful blended programme to life is less
    than the sum of the thinking to get it ready.*

</aside>

<figure id="_10_CHAPTER_C08_UFigure_8_4" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF004.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_10_CHAPTER_C08_UFigure_8_9" class="figure"
aria-describedby="_10_CHAPTER_C08_UFigure_8_9_details">
<p><img src="content/images/M10UF001.png"
alt="The figure shows 4 clusters of factors." /></p>
<details id="_10_CHAPTER_C08_UFigure_8_9_details">
<summary>
Figure details
</summary>
<p>The factors are as follows:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Mindset: focused on your learner, thinking resources not just
courses, creative thinking, problem solving</p></li>
<li><p>Skillset: digital learning, facilitation, project management,
managing experts, videography, comms, marketing, data
evaluation</p></li>
<li><p>Toolset: all learning methodologies, instructional
design</p></li>
<li><p>Dataset: Emerald Works benchmark data, industry report,
capability assessments</p></li>
</ul>
</details>
</figure>

<aside aria-label="Tip (8.3)" class="tip" id="_10_CHAPTER_C08_sec_005" role="complementary">

<figure id="_10_CHAPTER_C08_UFigure_8_5" class="figure">
<p><span id="10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_185" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 185" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF005.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_10_CHAPTER_C08_UTable_8_1" class="table">
<p><a href="#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml__10_CHAPTER_C08_sec_006">Skip
table</a></p>
<div class="table" role="table" tabindex="0">
<table class="left">
<thead>
<tr>
<th scope="col"><p>Tweet</p></th>
<th scope="col"><p>Tips checklist</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><p>03-Feb-15 Try a Massive Online Open Course. Could a MOOC work for
your business? #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Mix in a MOOC</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>04-Feb-15 Using fiddle toys in face to face sessions? Share pics
of them online as a physical aide memoire to delegates
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Share events photos</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>16-Feb-15 Switch on learning radio at work. Try @Engage4Success
Mondays at 4pm <a
href="https://www.blogtalkradio.com/engage-for-success/2016/02/29/show-150-engaging-your-team-to-increase-performance"><span
class="url-hyperlink">https://www.blogtalkradio.com/engage-for-success/2016/02/29/show-150-engaging-your-team-to-increase-performance</span></a>
(archived at <a href="https://perma.cc/UR9R-27Q9"><span
class="url-hyperlink">https://perma.cc/UR9R-27Q9</span></a>)
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Try learning radio</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>02-Apr-15 Great blog from @PeopleAlchemy &gt;ping #NoPlasters –
Putting informal learning and 70:20:10 to work to boost capability <a
href="https://www.trainingzone.co.uk/community/blogs/paul-matthews/putting-informal-learning-and-702010-to-work-to-boost-capability"><span
class="url-hyperlink">https://www.trainingzone.co.uk/community/blogs/paul-matthews/putting-informal-learning-and-702010-to-work-to-boost-capability</span></a>
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Be informal</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>08-Apr-15 Make learning multi-channel via intranet, team meets,
coffee chats, lunch &amp; learn, formal courses &amp; social
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Create multiple layers</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>05-May-15 Are you aware of how PowerPoint can create good
content? You can make videos from slides using animation tool
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Make best use of PowerPoint</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>03-Jun-15 Try podcasts as new way of sharing learning. Take a
smartphone &amp; expert into a quiet room to record their tips
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Podcasts are easy</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>17-Jun-15 Love this summary of Flipped Classroom. Something to
try in workplace learning #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Flip your classrooms</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>26-Jun-15 Don’t be afraid to embrace art in your org’s learning
e.g. as a memory trigger #FF @SimonHeath1 @dougshaw1
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Don’t forget art</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><span id="10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_186" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 186" role="doc-pagebreak"></span>30-Jun-15 Coffee Break
learning? Why not?! Watch @LearningNowTV repeat NOW. Register to watch
<a href="http://learningnow.tv/"><span
class="url-hyperlink">http://learningnow.tv/</span></a>
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Curate from LNTV</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>15-Jul-15 Using photos as learning prompts and aides memoire is
very powerful and easy to share #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Photos of events as memory aids</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>19-Aug-15 Create blend in mini-pilots via multichannels eg
intranet, course sharing, lunch &amp; learn, learner reflection
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Mini-pilots help shape direction</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>19-Aug-15 A non tech way to improve is have your trainers blend
in ideas such as stretch projects pre- / post-classroom
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Blend within face to face</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>21-Aug-15 A low tech way to improve is record internal expert
podcasts on to CD and distribute amongst remote locations
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Don’t forget older tech too</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>14-Oct-15 Running webinars take practise. You can learn a lot by
attending webinars too. Try <a
href="http://learningandskillsgroup.ning.com/"><span
class="url-hyperlink">http://learningandskillsgroup.ning.com/</span></a>
(archived at <a href="https://perma.cc/CJM2-4VBU"><span
class="url-hyperlink">https://perma.cc/CJM2-4VBU</span></a>)
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Webinar is an easy way to get online</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>26-Nov-15 Try putting in a mentoring scheme as one little
victory. 10 mentees with 10 mentors together for learning
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Set up a mentor scheme</strong></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
</figure>

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (8.4)" class="box" id="_10_CHAPTER_C08_sec_006" role="complementary">

<figure id="_10_CHAPTER_C08_UFigure_8_6" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF006.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Who is holding learning back from modernising in your organisation?
    Why? Is it you?

-   Do L&Ders have the skills required to blend learning?

-   Are line managers and senior managers on board with having a
    continuous learning culture? Are they still expecting you to be
    transactional?

-   []{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_187 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 187"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}Does learning have the trust and respect of the
    organisation required to shift the learning in your organisation?

-   Do you need a rebrand? What about a language audit?

-   People in an organisation don't care about learning as much as
    L&Ders. What if you ditch the word 'learning' altogether? How can
    you articulate your supportive work without using the word? Do
    people respond more favourably?

-   Do you need to consider a wider shift in learning thinking? Do you
    need to work with OD colleagues for this? What if you don't have OD
    colleagues?

-   How can you stretch learning beyond the course? What can you blend
    for better impact?

-   What are your project management skills like? Could they do with
    some work?

-   How will you measure value on the less tangible learning?

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (8.5)" class="box" id="_10_CHAPTER_C08_sec_007" role="complementary">

<figure id="_10_CHAPTER_C08_UFigure_8_7" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF007.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Focus on yourself. Be ruthlessly honest and kindly selfish. What do
    you need to move to a new learning mindset?

-   Run a skills audit and invest in yourself.

-   Consider the word 'performance' and what it means to you.

-   Focus on the willingness to change. Dig for evidence, find out why.

-   Seek out your experts and work closely on helping them share their
    stories.

-   Never underestimate the value of a great Project Manager. Increase
    your PM skills.

-   Try out the practical options and notice carefully how they land.

-   Measure and use the data to decide next steps.

-   Help the whole person learn well.

</aside>

::: {#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml__10_CHAPTER_C08_sec_008 .section .references .bibliography aria-label="THE LIBRARY LIST (8.6)" role="doc-bibliography"}
<figure id="_10_CHAPTER_C08_UFigure_8_8" class="figure">
<p><span id="10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_188" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 188" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF008.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Arets, J, Jennings, C, and Heijnen, V (2015) *70:20:10 Towards 100%
    Performance*, Sulter Media, Maastricht

-   CIPD (2020) Learning and Skills at Work, *CIPD* \[online\]
    [[www.cipd.co.uk/Images/learning-skills-work-report-1_tcm18-79434.pdf]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.cipd.co.uk/Images/learning-skills-work-report-1_tcm18-79434.pdf)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/V47G-RCPF]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/V47G-RCPF))

-   Clark, D (n.d.) 10 Facts about learning that are scientifically
    proven, *Learning Pool* \[online\]
    [[www.learningpool.com/donald-clarks-10-facts-about-learning-that-are-scientifically-proven/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.learningpool.com/donald-clarks-10-facts-about-learning-that-are-scientifically-proven/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/R496-9X9A]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/R496-9X9A))

-   D'Souza, D (2015) Classroom Learning -- and Why Some Organisations
    Still Need it, *101 Half Connected Things* \[online\]
    [[www.daviddsouza.com/2015/05/11/classroom-learning-and-why-some-organisations-still-need-it/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.daviddsouza.com/2015/05/11/classroom-learning-and-why-some-organisations-still-need-it/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/6SK6-AJTK]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/6SK6-AJTK))

-   Drybrough, J (2016) Trust the process (aka reflections from an
    unconference), *fuschia blue* \[online\]
    [[www.fuchsiablueblog.wordpress.com/2016/02/19/trust-the-process-aka-reflections-from-an-unconference/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.fuchsiablueblog.wordpress.com/2016/02/19/trust-the-process-aka-reflections-from-an-unconference/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/QE8F-Z4Q3]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/QE8F-Z4Q3))

-   Engage for Success radio (n.d.) Engage for Success -- Employee
    Engagement, *Blog Talk Radio* \[online\]
    [[www.blogtalkradio.com/engage-for-success]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.blogtalkradio.com/engage-for-success)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/R5H5-P55H]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/R5H5-P55H))

-   International Association of Facilitators \[online\]
    [[www.iaf-world.org/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.iaf-world.org/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/SZ9K-CT6X]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/SZ9K-CT6X))

-   Learning and Skills Group (n.d.) Webinars, *Learning and Skills
    Group* \[online\]
    [[www.learningandskillsgroup.ning.com/page/webinars-1]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.learningandskillsgroup.ning.com/page/webinars-1)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/VMS7-UDUH]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/VMS7-UDUH))

-   Matthews, P (2015) Putting informal learning and 70:20:10 to work to
    boost capability, *Training Zone* \[online\]
    [[www.trainingzone.co.uk/community/blogs/paul-matthews/putting-informal-learning-and-702010-to-work-to-boost-capability]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.trainingzone.co.uk/community/blogs/paul-matthews/putting-informal-learning-and-702010-to-work-to-boost-capability)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/HW8V-QFGN]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/HW8V-QFGN))

-   Street Wisdom \[online\]
    [[www.streetwisdom.org/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.streetwisdom.org/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/QC5E-SUXZ]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/QC5E-SUXZ))

-   Wyke, K (2014) Open Space -- 4 rules, 2 roles and 1 law: principles
    of an unconference, *YouTube* \[online\]
    [[www.youtube.com/watch?v=B6L4kFiWauI]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B6L4kFiWauI)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/KX4L-26TW]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/KX4L-26TW))
:::

::: {#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml__10_CHAPTER_C08_sec_009 .section .endnotes aria-labelledby="_10_CHAPTER_C08_h1_009"}
# []{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_189 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 189" role="doc-pagebreak"}Notes {#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml__10_CHAPTER_C08_h1_009 .title}

[1](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml__10_CHAPTER_C08_Endnote_8_1_reference) See
more details at
[[www.702010institute.com/702010-model/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.702010institute.com/702010-model/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/PH4A-6A8B]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/PH4A-6A8B))

[2](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml__10_CHAPTER_C08_Endnote_8_2_reference) Arets,
J, Jennings, C, and Heijnen, V (2015) *70:20:10 Towards 100%
Performance*, Sulter Media, Maastricht, p54. For the roles, see
[[www.702010institute.com/new-roles-services-hrd-702010/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.702010institute.com/new-roles-services-hrd-702010/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/GYC7-7RD7]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/GYC7-7RD7))

[3](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml__10_CHAPTER_C08_Endnote_8_3_reference) IAF
Code of Conduct,
[[www.iaf-world.org/site/professional/iaf-code-of-ethics]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.iaf-world.org/site/professional/iaf-code-of-ethics)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/585J-GTBH]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/585J-GTBH))

[4](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml__10_CHAPTER_C08_Endnote_8_4_reference) Try the
branched video and feel the emotion at
[[www.life-saver.org.uk/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.life-saver.org.uk/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/2S7H-BLDU]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/2S7H-BLDU))

[5](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml__10_CHAPTER_C08_Endnote_8_5_reference)
ELECTRIC Online^®^ sample videos and information gives you a look at how
you can change an approach to learning:
[[www.theocm.co.uk/customer/electric-coaching-0/electric-online]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.theocm.co.uk/customer/electric-coaching-0/electric-online)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/E9A2-BURQ]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/E9A2-BURQ))[]{#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml_page_190
.pagebreak aria-label="Page 190" role="doc-pagebreak"}
:::

[]{#11_PART_P02.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

:::: {#11_PART_P02.xhtml__11_PART_P02_sec_001 .section .part .part aria-labelledby="_11_PART_P02_h1_001" role="doc-part"}
<div>

[]{#11_PART_P02.xhtml_page_191 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 191"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[[Part]{.label .label} [Two]{.ordinal
.ordinal}](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_11_PART_P02_sec_001)

# [Frameworks](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_11_PART_P02_sec_001) {#11_PART_P02.xhtml__11_PART_P02_h1_001 .title}

</div>

These next three chapters of this book focus on three different
frameworks that I use in my business, Kairos Modern Learning. These are
overarching in their approach and are not learning design models. They
are simply frameworks generated to improve L&D for numerous clients that
worked well for us both. They are ICE (Information, Communication and
Education), EPC (Environment, Permission and Culture) and the three Rs
(Required, Resourced, Referred). In this part, the case studies are
shared from my client work, so there are no Case Study Reflections in
these chapters, but a Doing It Right section
instead.[]{#11_PART_P02.xhtml_page_192 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 192"
role="doc-pagebreak"}
::::

[]{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

<div>

[]{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_193 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 193"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[[09]{.ordinal
.ordinal}](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_12_CHAPTER_C09_sec_001)

# [ICE -- Information, Communication and Education](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_12_CHAPTER_C09_sec_001) {#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml__12_CHAPTER_C09_h1_001 .title}

Kairos Modern Learning's framework for managing information

</div>

<figure id="_12_CHAPTER_C09_Figure_9_1" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M12NF001.png"
alt="The figure shows a building with two pillars labeled communication and education holding up the roof labeled information." /></p>
<figcaption><p><a
href="#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml#loi_12_CHAPTER_C09_Figure_9_1"><span
class="label">Figure</span> <span class="ordinal">9.1</span> ICE
Framework</a></p></figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="_11_CHAPTER_C09_UFigure_9_1" class="figure">
<p><span id="12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_194" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 194" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF001.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

Information flow around a business is paramount

There is a lot of information coming at people in organisations all of
the time. Some of that information needs to be taught to people and some
of it needs to be told to people. It's really important to make a
distinction between the two, and to understand what that distinction is
and how it relates to us in L&D. We are responsible for what needs to be
taught. What needs to be taught is normally the preserve of Internal
Comms, line managers or the person who created the information in the
first place.

Businesses need information to keep moving and growing, and it is
important, therefore, to share and enrich the information along the way.
In support of this endeavour, as shown in [Figure
9.1](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml__12_CHAPTER_C09_Figure_9_1), are
Communication and Education, two pillars which hold Information aloft.
These three components are the key to the ICE framework for thinking
about information and the extent to which L&D needs to know, manage, and
get involved with a business's information flow. In this context, we can
define the three components of the ICE framework as follows:

-   Information -- particulars within a business, facts, figures, data,
    policies, processes, people details, departmental details, product
    details, practical application of information (i.e. knowledge,
    skills, behaviours).

-   Communication -- the sending, storage and sharing of information in
    and around a business to enable people to know the context of their
    jobs.

-   Education -- the teaching of information, particularly knowledge,
    skills and behaviours, to facilitate the transfer of information to
    enable people to do their jobs.

The reason we need such a framework is because information in
organisations often stalls, gets stuck, or doesn't get shared. If it is
shared, it can be misunderstood or confusing. When we consider the roles
of Comms and L&D in distributing information to employees, we can get
some clarity on how we can add value to this very important element of
business, that of information flow.

Learning and education are framed by history, both wider social history
and the history of your organisation itself. It is important to reflect
on this []{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_195 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 195" role="doc-pagebreak"}to help understand how best
to apply the ICE framework. During the Industrial Revolution, we moved
from working in the fields to working in factories, a process that led
eventually to 9 to 5 working days, and, for many, 24-hour shift
patterns. Maintaining the social structures of the time, we moved to a
slightly different form of hierarchy; from overseers to line managers.
Industrialisation drove the need for education, and by the early 19th
century formal education started for the masses. The Victorian
classroom, with passive students learning by rote, persists in our image
of education. Even in live online platforms, people 'put their hand up',
an expression of ingrained classroom behaviour. It is very important
that you, as the L&D lead and education expert, think carefully about
how best to pass on information and not revert back to the 'sage on the
stage' or classroom format for all delivery.

We need to recognise that in L&D we are a conduit for helping people do
their jobs better. We are a back-office function in an organisation, in
the same way that HR or Finance are. That may not sound very exciting or
impressive and you may think I'm downgrading what we or HR and Finance
teams do, but I'm not. What we in L&D do is hugely important at a
fundamental level, but we are not the owners of information or the
gatekeepers of knowledge. Some people may think we are; that we are the
'gurus' in our organisation, but we are not, nor should we want to be.
We are there to help people understand and synthesise information into
their working context, to enable them to do their jobs.

Similarly, Internal Comms may also feel they have a gatekeeper role, and
for some organisations I have worked with, this has unfortunately been a
strongly-held belief. This is problematic, because like L&D, Comms are
not the only information source or the subject matter experts.
Therefore, Comms and L&D are sadly often blockers to information.
Applying the ICE framework helps us remember to how to keep information
moving, to consider how best to enable the flow of information.

The word 'flow' has a double meaning within this framework. The first
meaning of flow is to get into the mindset of flow, or 'in the zone', as
it is often referred to. The second meaning is to get into the flow of
work, i.e. doing productive work, which requires information to flow and
learning to flow in order for there to be productivity. If people don't
know how to do their jobs or lack information to do their jobs, there
cannot be productive flow. Being in the zone, with the right information
and learning behind you, accounts for successful flow at work. L&D's
role in the ICE framework is to uphold information flow (the second
meaning here) in such a way as to allow employees to be in *flow* or in
the zone. In his book *Flow*, Mihaly []{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_196
.pagebreak aria-label="Page 196" role="doc-pagebreak"}Csíkszentmihályi
reminds us that work needs to not be interrupted to be productive, as
people get into a mental state of full immersion into their work where
they are fully active, full of energy, fully productive and enjoying
their work (Csíkszentmihályi, 2010).

Something as simple as not knowing how to add filters to a spreadsheet
could stop the flow of the comprehending of data. Is it L&D's job to get
involved in this level of minutiae? Can't a person simply Google it or
work it out by trial and error? This is entirely dependent on your
cohort. Do you know them well enough to make that call? For some of you,
such required learning will be a minor hiccup in an employee's day, that
they have the wherewithal to work out themselves. For others, it will be
a huge mountain to be overcome and one where you can ensure a job aid or
mini e-learning will save the day. Knowing your audience is crucial to
upholding the flow of information alongside our Comms colleagues.

In L&D, we are here to support people and help them to do their jobs
more effectively. It is important for us to help people make sense of
information that flows through a business. Whereas the Communication
element involves 'telling' people about a new policy or process, the
Education element offers clarity of understanding through learning. We
teach *how* to follow the process, whereas Comms shares information
about the new process in the first place. That's what this chapter is
all about -- what we do and what we leave to others to do.

<figure id="_11_CHAPTER_C09_UFigure_9_2" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF002.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

[ICE
Framework](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_12_CHAPTER_C09_h3_001)

The Information, Communication and Education framework is a way of
thinking about our roles, our values and what we bring to L&D in an
organisation. It reminds us to not control everything. It helps us learn
from our colleagues in Comms and work together to uphold, build, and
share the right information, to the right people, in the right way in
our organisation. We can use this framework in the context of
organisations of all types and sectors. Although there is an entire
sector devoted to the selling of know­ledge and information, all
organisations have information to share and learn.

[]{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_197 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 197"
role="doc-pagebreak"}The pinnacle of the ICE framework, Information, is
supported by the two pillars of Communication and Education to maintain
the flow of information around an organisation. But they are two
separate functions. For example, L&D would never really get involved in
an intranet site -- the library of information such as company policies
-- unless it were to use it as a signpost to a learning offer, including
ensuring those policies have been understood. We don't write or own the
policies -- that is the information -- nor do we share the policies or
monitor whether they have been read, which is more likely the remit of
Internal Comms or Human Resources. However we help those policies to be
digested in the context of work. Without the pillars supporting the
sharing and the understanding, the policies are simply information left
to go dusty in a metaphorical intranet cupboard.

What I am focusing on here is taking information and supporting people,
teaching them, and educating them to think for themselves within the
context of their organisation and the information they possess. It's
about L&D as enablers. In this capacity, we operate alongside the
information generators in our organisation, whether that's the senior
leadership team, HR, Finance, Sales, Internal Comms, Marketing, or
whomever else. L&D's focus needs to be on how we get the best
performance, how we engage with our departments in order to ensure we
are all working towards the one strategic goal of our organisation, and
how L&D can help to get the best out of our workforce. We need to seek
and share information to support our mission.

[What is
information?](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_12_CHAPTER_C09_h3_002)

For me, information is what flows around a business. It's the oil that
keeps the wheels turning, it's the mindset of 'how we do things around
here', it's the processes. It's basically the stuff that the knowledge
economy defines as being gold. It's what we sell and it's the richness
of how we sell it. It's what we make and it's the processes that enable
us to make it. Basically, it's all the information that sits within the
business that makes the business what it is. So, information is
critical, absolutely critical.

And because it's so critical, we need to understand who creates that
information and who owns it; it is rarely going to be the Learning &
Development department. However, we do have a responsibility towards
that information and we need to understand what that is. We also need to
understand who we are working alongside with in relation to that
information, which is where the C in the framework -- Communication --
comes in.

[]{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_198 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 198"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[Upholding the flow of
information](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_12_CHAPTER_C09_h3_003)

L&D exists to help people make sense of information, whatever the
information might be. If it's how to use a machine in a factory, then,
through our process of consultation described in Part 1 of this book,
L&D must be aware of what people need to know in order to use the
machine. We need to ensure that have the skills to use the machine and,
just as importantly, we need to ensure that people have the
problem-solving skills that will help them in the flow of work, to solve
any problems that arise with the machine later on. Do we really need to
facilitate in such a scenario? Can't the person next to them on the
machine just show them, or can't they watch a video about it. Yes,
absolutely. However, as we have already seen in Part 1, L&D has an
important role in surfacing the right ways to do things, to eliminate
happenchance learning in favour of certainty. We also need to ensure
that learners have access at the right time to the right information
needed to learn how to do their job so as not to interrupt the flow. The
information about the machine exists within the business; our role is to
provide the information to those that need it when they need it.

You may ask if we even need to consider a framework about information
flow, as surely everyone in the business knows stuff and they simply
share it. If this were genuinely true, L&D would have ceased to exist
decades ago. Human beings are programmed to survive. For years, in
business, this has been by keeping knowledge to ourselves. Promotions
based on those with the most knowledge and experience have been a very
commonplace occurrence. Sadly, human beings are also good at forgetting.
If we are told something, we don't generally easily remember it.
Ebbinghaus' research is often quoted in such situations (Meurre & Dros,
2015). Although I appreciate his research was concerned with remembering
strings of numbers rather than real information, the forgetting curve is
a reality. Imagine if you remembered absolutely everything you were told
from birth. We just can't keep it all in.

In order to retain information, our brains need to form neural pathways
to embed learning. Consider driving a car, riding a bike, learning to
read, learning to walk, even breathing. We need to repeat tasks and
repeat the cognitive process around those to help information be
retained in our brain. Information itself will not always stick in
people's brains. Anyone who works in marketing or communications will
tell you they have to repeat, repeat, repeat to get messages heard. As
L&D practitioners, we need to know that telling isn't learning and
learning isn't 'injection education'. Making good use of models such as
David Rock's AGES, Stella Collins' []{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_199
.pagebreak aria-label="Page 199" role="doc-pagebreak"}sticky learning or
Amy Brann's ideas on presentations can help us work more effectively in
this framework (Davachi *et al*, 2010; Collins, 2016; Brann, 2013).

[The balance of teach and
tell](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_12_CHAPTER_C09_h3_004)

We learnt in the Case Study in [Chapter 4](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml) that
Virtual College asked me to help them become consultative L&Ders. I had
the information they needed to change their approach to sales. I could,
of course, simply have told them the information they wanted. I could
have used a variety of learning tools to do that -- video, lectures or
individual, personalised chats. However, these would have produced very
passive experiences, and ultimately would not have been helpful nor
created long-term change. Consider the situation through the ICE lens.
What is the information and how is it best shared? Information is out
there; it's everywhere. Our job in L&D is to help people make sense of
it for themselves. If we simply pass on information, we will find our
careers are very short.

Taking the information and making an active learning offer that enables
learners to feel, hear, and see the information in action works more
powerfully, and is, in the long term, more effective, engaging,
enjoyable, and efficient. It is certainly stickier. I set Virtual
College off on a journey with inspiration from industry experts and with
a really clear understanding of the problem they were trying to solve.
The ICE framework helped me consider all the options and strike a
balance between tell and teach. They owned their development and their
success. I gave them direction towards meaningful research, and they did
the legwork to arrive at a new consultative approach for themselves.
They put in the time and effort as self-directed, yet collective
learners. They created something relevant, linked to their work and
goal, and they taught it to their teams.

The ICE framework reminds us of the fine balance between tell and teach,
between communication and education. Sometimes in L&D we over complicate
the simple. People can get frustrated that when they want the answer to
get on with their job, we 'teach' them. They just want the information.
Yet sometimes, the information alone will not create the desired and
required outcome. The ICE framework is a sense check -- do they need
education or communication? Putting someone on an e-learning programme,
even an interactive and interesting one, is not always successful; not
because 'everyone hates e-learning', but because it was more than was
necessary. If you do not know how to use the photocopier, a pictorial
job aid that is laminated and []{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_200
.pagebreak aria-label="Page 200" role="doc-pagebreak"}stuck on the lid
is way more effective as a learning tool than an abstract offsite,
hands-off e-learning session or video on how to use it. ICE is an
aide-memoire to L&Ders to use the correct pillar, Communication or
Education, to achieve the goal of providing Information.

[This is not Comms versus
L&D](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_12_CHAPTER_C09_h3_005)

Don't get too caught up in what domains are Comms and which are L&D's.
We are not pitted against each other within this framework. Indeed,
quite the opposite is true; both are pillars to uphold the flow of
information. We can learn from each other's disciplines, and even add in
a third pillar, if needed in your context; for example, marketing. From
marketing, we can learn how campaigns work really well in improving
motivation and embedding learning -- from the promotions and
preparation, to the hook and buzz. The emotional responses to marketing
campaigns can also be adapted for learning, as it makes learning very
memorable. The Channel 4 / Acteon case study in [Chapter
6](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml) is a great example of taking communication
techniques used by marketing to build a campaign around learning; in
this case, 'Is it ok?' for anti-bribery and corruption training.

Simple, communicative, campaign-led teaching helps people to understand
information in the moment when they need it, and remember it for future
use. All the how to in your organisation can be tested using the ICE
framework to bring you to the most simple and necessary, uncomplicated
learning solutions:

-   *Functional information*, e.g. how to book holiday time. Information
    in the flow of work that just needs a simple platform user guide to
    tell people how to use the software and a contact if they get stuck.

-   *Crucial information*, e.g. how to act in the event of a fire.
    Important information that needs communicating regularly together
    with a physical fire drill to help the brain learn and imprint what
    to do and where to go.

-   *Multifaceted information*, e.g. how to lead a team meeting. Complex
    information on process, psychology, leadership skills. OK, now we
    are likely to be deeper into learning territory than simple comms.

Induction is a classic example of businesses getting the ICE framework
wrong, by overloading and telling people instead of helping them learn.
Consider your induction process. How much of the information is given as
simply communication and how much is taught with a view to recall and
embedding? Is the balance right? Are your pillars supporting the new
hire []{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_201 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 201"
role="doc-pagebreak"}with the information to do their job or are those
pillars a bit off kilter and preventing that new starter from being
productive as quickly as they could be? So often we overload new hires
with so much information in their first couple of weeks that they spend
time over the next few months trying to make sense of it and apply it to
a new context that they are still learning about. One online fashion
retailer set up a terrific video-based induction programme delivered via
an easy-to-use mobile app-based learning tool, perfect for revisiting at
point of need. They replicated the tool across management training too.
Yet I also wonder whether such self-paced learning, which can be
referred to anytime, even fulfils the point-of-need nature of modern
life. Do people really want to revisit a whole video weeks into the job
when simply wanting a fact, such as the name of a colleague in the
video? A transcript within the app of the video in question helps uphold
that information at point of need. The perfect balance between learning
and comms.

L&D need to consider different scenarios around learning and
communicating information. Increasingly, in a fast-paced, always on,
search engine-driven world, people are less interested in retaining
information and more interested in being able to access it when they
need it. This is why curation is so important. Don't get precious about
'is it learning?' or 'is it comms?', just consider things from a
learner's perspective. What do they need to remain productive in the
flow of work? Perhaps videos around the building activated by QR code or
NFC (near-field
communication)[]{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml__12_CHAPTER_C09_Endnote_9_1_reference
.anchor}^[1](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml__12_CHAPTER_C09_Endnote_9_1)^ would
be just the thing to keep work going, rather than waiting and going out
for a day's training.

[Education and communication
crossover](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_12_CHAPTER_C09_h3_006)

You need to be mindful that there may well be other people in the
business who take a role in education and communication -- maybe tech
teams, or Marketing, internal people or external people. When other
people are involved, you need to be really clear where remits start and
end. Otherwise, it can start to get problematic as you get pulled into
stuff that isn't actually your area of expertise. Or learning gets
missed. Or something doesn't work and you get lambasted for not doing a
good job when it actually wasn't ever your job to do it in the first
place. Both you and your Comms colleagues have to avoid being in such
situations. By understanding where your remit starts and ends, and
knowing when you can (and should) say no with authority and push people
towards another department, the crossovers become clearer.

[]{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_202 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 202"
role="doc-pagebreak"}The fact that information needs to flow freely
around a business is of paramount importance, not least because it
enables businesses to communicate well with their teams. This
communication enables teams to understand what the strategic direction
is, to understand what the work is, and what they are doing every day in
their jobs. Information is absolutely key. You don't want to restrict
the communication flow to just internal people, though. It is also
really important that information flows to customers too; after all,
what is a business without customers? Companies have to keep the
information flow going. I can't say too many times how important this is
for businesses -- it's gold, it's the richness for business. With so
many people having to work remotely, never has the need been greater for
clear communication. Human beings communicate all the time, including
non-verbally, which is trickier in remote working.

Knowing what your L&D remit is, and when to say no, helps you to stay
crystal clear on your focus, your purpose as a learning professional.
The key to using the ICE framework stems from that understanding of our
remit.

[Adult Learning
Theory](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_12_CHAPTER_C09_h3_007)

In order to understand the remit of L&D more fully, it can be helpful to
get a handle on Adult Learning Theory because we need to understand how
we use information and how we educate people with that information in
the best, most effective way. It helps us be clear on what is within the
scope of L&D and what is not.

Malcolm Knowles is famed for popularising Adult Learning Theory --
andragogy[]{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml__12_CHAPTER_C09_Endnote_9_2_reference
.anchor}^[2](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml__12_CHAPTER_C09_Endnote_9_2)^, as
opposed to pedagogy, learning instruction to children. Knowles' theory
has four basic elements:

1.  Adults are self-directed and thus need a say in their learning.

2.  Build on existing knowledge and experience.

3.  Application of learning to their context.

4.  Solve problems.

David Hayden, in *Learning and Development Practice in the Workplace*,
argues that we should indeed move on further from andragogy to
heutagogy, which is self-determined learning (Beevers *et al*, 2019).
This requires learners to have knowledge and skills, plus confidence in
those to fulfil their own learning needs. Such self-determination in
learning puts the emphasis on the individual to drive how they learn. It
is closely linked to ideas []{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_203 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 203" role="doc-pagebreak"}on self-determination
motivation theory and connectivism learning theory, which presuppose
that learning in the digital age is networked and connected. In the same
way, Julian Stodd talks about the value that lies in knowledge sharing,
not knowledge stockpiling; we must recognise that successful learning
happens in organisations where adults are free to learn, share and grow
as they need (Stodd, 2016).

[Curation](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_12_CHAPTER_C09_h3_008)

What the ICE framework adds to these more academic approaches is a lens
to remind us of our role in self-determined learning. Remember,
information is everywhere, internally and externally. Such information
isn't owned by L&D. We are there to support the flow of information and
the understanding of it in context. If we advocate for self-determined
learning, we need to ensure our learners have the skills in discernment
and curation to understand what they need, where to find it and, most
importantly, the importance of provenance. We should set the gold
standard in curation to role-model the skills that learners themselves
need to gain -- for example, by helping people to understand where
relevant information can be found. Who owns the information our learners
need? What is their agenda? How transparent are they? How biased is the
information? How easy is it for learners to get what they need? How can
they contextualise? How can they link back to what they know and build
on that experience? How can they find what they need to solve their
problems?

Even in a connected, self-driven learning world, there is a place for
L&D to be a strong pillar of support. Crafting learning through curation
is one way we can help learners find the right stuff, make sense of it,
and apply it to their work. As Andy Lancaster states, 'Curation is not a
haphazard activity, but the deliberate process undertaken by curious,
motivated professionals.' (Lancaster, 2019 pp207-208). And AI has a
place here too -- at least, in the collection of information to curate.
The piecing together of the story, the sense-making elements and the
sharing need a person -- at least for the time being.

In considering how best to support the sharing and sense-making of
information, the ICE framework is heavily influenced by the
Seek-Sense-Share framework of the learning expert and consultant, Harold
Jarche (Jarche, 2014). Andy Lancaster takes this model further with his
CURATE model; Champion, Unearth, Refine, Aggregate, Transfer and Embed
(Lancaster, 2019). Considering what is useful to people in your
business, []{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_204 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 204" role="doc-pagebreak"}considering when best to
share it, considering how best to help people make sense of it; these
are all useful in upholding information. This book is not the place to
reiterate the work of two impressive thinkers in detail; however, I
point you towards their work to upskill yourselves on curation. This is
curation in action. You are self-determined adults. If curation is
important to you in your context, you now have two places to go to for
further reading.

Of course, curation should go much deeper than pointing people to
resources; as Andy says, we need to refine and aggregate before
transfer. This is where L&D adds value. We are not just chucking
resources at a wall like mud and hoping something sticks. That is not
curation; it is confusing for people. It is haphazard and expecting
people to make sense of their own learning.

[Storytelling](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_12_CHAPTER_C09_h3_009)

Julian Stodd's Narrative Engagement Technology (NET) model helps us to
think about how to share curation in a meaningful way (Stodd, 2016). The
model starts with narrative. If we seek, sense, and share, we really
need to make understood the narrative we are offering through sharing,
both to ensure that learners will engage, but also that the context of
the information works within the learner's real world. Relevant
anecdotes focus the application of learning.

Stories of every kind work when they pull people in, when they make a
connection, when an emotional response triggers a reaction. In L&D, we
have to enable stories to be heard. Although you may think that this is
what communications departments do (and you would be correct to a
certain degree), if we want the stories that need to be told, from a
learning perspective, told in a way that lands, that provokes an
emotional reaction, then we need to think of ourselves as comms and
marketers, as well as L&D people. Remember the ICE framework is about
working in harmony with other information stakeholders. We need to stay
close to Internal Comms. We need to learn from our Marketing colleagues
about campaign learning (Nancarrow, 2019).

Storytelling's role in a modern learning culture is to help people learn
seamlessly, in the flow of work. L&D needs people to be learning and
sharing continuously. Some of that will happen organically, some of it
we will need to facilitate, such as setting up common interest groups or
mentoring schemes. There will be a multitude of informal socialised
communities []{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_205 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 205" role="doc-pagebreak"}across your workplace -- the
new starters support group, the lunchtime running club, the Customer
Service team, the vegan recipe sharing club, the coffee addicts, the
smokers, the gym mates, etc. L&D can seek them out and find out how they
are glued together. What stories are they telling? What information are
they seeking? What is the golden thread? Once you've found that thread,
you can replicate it and encourage a learning focus. Going where people
are already sharing stories and learning from each other is easier than
directing them somewhere else (although I acknowledge that isn't always
possible, which is where the cake theory explained in [Chapter
3](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml) may be useful). If people feel they are in a
safe, supportive environment where they are empowered to share
experiences and knowledge, this is a sound foundation for L&D to embed
the idea of successful, social learning in the workplace. It's amazing
how momentum picks up once you start the ball rolling.

[Motivation](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_12_CHAPTER_C09_h3_010)

Self-directed adult learning theories, good curation, engaging story
telling -- these all only work if there is motivation to learn in the
first place. Using the ICE framework can ensure that you don't
overcomplicate things with learning initiatives when communicating
information quickly and clearly is what will keep people motivated in
work.

Self-directed approaches to learning require appropriate levels of
trust, the importance of which was covered in [Chapter
6](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml). You also need to know how the structures in
place aid or abate motivation.

Some of the issues around trust and motivation are entrenched in
literally hundreds of years of normality. In the Industrial Revolution,
we moved from working in fields to working in factories, introducing the
idea of a time-controlled workplace. The idea of work hierarchy,
particularly over­seers, the forerunners to line managers, was reinforced
to a people formerly somewhat distant from their bosses, being almost
autonomous in their agricultural work. The concept of wages was
introduced to a people largely used to growing their food and bartering,
to link workers to productivity, and being on task. Factory bosses
imposed fines for anything that reduced production -- talking, leaving
the machine, being late, opening windows, even eating.

This is a somewhat simplified view of industrialisation, but it rings
true that in moving from field to factory new structures had to be put
in place. The change was immense and impactful on all layers of society.
Autonomy []{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_206 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 206" role="doc-pagebreak"}in work, though not fully
present in fields, was most certainly less present in factories. As we
moved from factories to offices, we moved towards a veneer of civility
as we added desks and chairs and pot plants, but we brought with us the
hierarchies, the time keeping, the motivation through reward, through
force of habit rather than through necessity or desire.

These structures and norms are still in play today, and they are
contrary not just to Knowles' theory of learning but to motivational
theories too, such as Dan Pink's views on autonomy, mastery and purpose
(Pink, 2009). In a world where L&D is about increasing performance,
motivation is key -- motivation to learn, to share, to grow. Pink argues
that we need to have purpose, a wish to attain mastery, and, crucially,
to be autonomous in order to be motivated to do anything. Apply that
theory to learning and we are back with heutagogy as a driving force.

Looking at motivation through the ICE lens is paramount. If your
organisation is back in the 20th or even 19th centuries when it comes to
acceptance of motivational theory, you will struggle with a
self-directed approach to learning. You will struggle for information to
flow freely, as lower motivation will always mean lower learning,
sharing, curating, and storytelling. Information, particularly
knowledge, will stagnate and leave your business, as people will not be
motivated to share.

[Knowledge
management](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_12_CHAPTER_C09_h3_011)

Knowledge management as a domain is bigger than the information in
people's heads, I appreciate that. Although we have already talked about
knowledge management in [Chapters 6](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml) and
[7](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml), in the context of the ICE framework, I would
like you to take a moment to consider what approach you take as an L&D
professional towards knowledge management in your organisation. The
approach is wrapped up in understanding the language of your
organisation and the culture, because those things play into the way
that knowledge management is conducted and the role that you play in
L&D. Culture lives in human interactions, is visible in behaviours
across organisations. Culture is heard in the communicated messages and
is the shorthand that makes organisations tick. This all needs to be
aligned to learning. Those with knowledge to share need to have a
culture of sharing. Both L&D and Comms have a role in that.

Do you harness the internal expert? Does your organisation only value
learning from outside expertise? What is considered kudos-worthy? Where
does kudos come from? Does it come from the work people do? The
know­ledge []{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_207 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 207" role="doc-pagebreak"}they hold? From the way they
share that knowledge? From the way they share the work they do? What
does L&D do to amplify, to ease, and to share knowledge?

Thinking about these questions and looking at what happens in your
organisation will help you to understand how well information is flowing
around, and why. Perhaps there are blockers to information flow. Perhaps
it is Human Resources, the senior leadership team, or Customer Services.
Or perhaps you have blockers unique to your business that you need to
consider. Are you working alongside and collaborating with these
blockers in order to maintain a flow of what people need to learn and
when?

There are lots of ways that knowledge management can happen, and, again,
it may not be within L&D's remit to be involved here. If you are, for
ease of curation and sharing, I encourage you to consider managing
information in your business electronically. If you capture and record
it, you can encourage people to share across such tech as enterprise
social networks or video-based learning platforms.

You want to get information into a shared space for two big reasons.
First, performance and productivity: information that could be useful to
individuals and organisations in supporting greater performance and
productivity should not be a secret. For example, a process work-around
that one person does in secret, but which would benefit a whole assembly
line needs to have an outlet for sharing. Perhaps they never notice they
do it, or never thought it useful, or were worried about getting into
trouble for not following standard process. If we consider the approach
to consultative L&D described in Part 1, we should have surfaced a
problem in process and be seeking out answers, hopefully arriving at the
individual stakeholder whose data shows they are more productive and
therein holds the key knowledge as to how to do things more effectively.

Second, the risk of not surfacing the information in people's heads
concerns what happens to that knowledge if people leave organisations.
If you haven't captured that information, then chances are it has gone
and that's a missed opportunity. Can you afford to miss opportunities?
As we have discussed in this chapter, our role in L&D is to support and
facilitate the flow of knowledge around an organisation. We have to help
people see the value in sharing their knowledge, and leaders to see the
value in encouraging this to happen.

It can be quite a shift for people to come round to this way of
thinking, that kudos no longer comes from the knowledge you hold in your
head, but from the knowledge that you share with others. That's a
journey you need []{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_208 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 208" role="doc-pagebreak"}to take people on, and some
people will find it a lot easier to accept and do than others.

Having identified people with knowledge, we need to have a system for
getting knowledge into the business and sharing it as required from a
learning perspective. That may be a physical process or a way of
working; for example, setting up a mentoring scheme. It may be a digital
system or platform enabling us to share knowledge, such as a social
collaborative learning space. You could also consider systems thinking,
such as Service Design or Design Thinking, which helps you to consider
'the way we do things around here', and what needs to shift to do it
better (see the case study in [Chapter 12](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml)).
Whether we have people having coffee together, or sharing videos online
with each other, all these types of ideas are ways of sharing, curating
and collaborating to move information around a business. L&D are in the
background, introducing people to each other, setting up mentoring
schemes, videoing internal experts, facilitating online social
communities. It could even look as if we are not doing anything, as
people are learning from people, getting kudos, even pay rises or
promotions for sharing not stockpiling their knowledge. However, this
concealed background work is perfect for L&D to undertake. In a true
learning culture, we should not to want be front and centre, we should
not want the glory. Helping to set up people learning from people is
foundational work which upholds the ease of access of information
sharing, and is exactly at the heart of the ICE framework.

In order to achieve such an enlightenment within your organisation, you
will need to draw on your influencing skills. Yet, you can't possibly
influence people and challenge the status quo (the kudos of retaining
knowledge versus the kudos of sharing knowledge) without having some
fundamentals in place, which is what we will look at in [Chapter
10](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml). For the moment, though -- assuming that we
have a) an understanding on how knowledge is managed within our
organisation, and b) a facility to share knowledge and increase the flow
of knowledge around an organisation -- then we are in a position to work
more freely alongside our subject matter experts, our stakeholders, and
other departments to ensure that this knowledge, this information, can
be taught, shared, and used as it needs to be across our organisation.

Let's consider, for example, our subject matter experts. These are the
people who hold knowledge and have potentially worked in our business
for a long time or who have been newly hired in precisely because they
are know­ledge experts. We need to extract that knowledge from their
heads and share it around. Our role is to motivate people to learn, to
share, and collectively []{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_209 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 209" role="doc-pagebreak"}grow by ensuring a flow of
information to the right people at the right time through the right
modes.

[The importance of *flow* and
*drive*](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_12_CHAPTER_C09_h3_012)

Like all good ideas, the idea of considering the flow of work is not
new, and certainly not unique to the ICE framework. Research by the
psychologist Mihaly Csíkszentmihályi was key to our comprehension of the
importance of flow. He talks about the state of flow being when you are
in the zone of work, when you are so into the work that it happens
almost in spite of you and what you are doing (Csíkszentmihályi, 2010).
When people are in this state of flow, that's when they are really
productive, so you don't want to interrupt flow, you want to keep it
going. If flow is interrupted, for example, by a lack of knowledge and
the need to seek information and learn something, it takes time to
return to the flow state.

I see L&D's part in creating this 'flow' state of work as smoothing out
processes and smoothing out the performance of people. What do I mean by
'smooth out'? In the context of education, this means helping people to
find information, hold knowledge and apply knowledge in the course of
their work. If you ease and facilitate this, then more people will be
working in a 'flow state'. We don't want to get in the way by putting
out a formal education piece that disrupts work unnecessarily. Using the
ICE framework, we can identify the best way to share information: why
create a classroom event when all that may be needed is a pamphlet of
information?

Csíkszentmihályi also talks about how you can't stay in a state of flow
indefinitely. You can only work at peak performance for a certain period
of time, which is another reason for not interrupting the flow. If that
flow will come to an end at some point, you want to let it reach its
natural conclusion. To help maintain the momentum of flow, L&D needs to
be effective in curating and ensuring access to such content, to provide
point-of-need support so that the flow can keep flowing for as long as
it can. We don't want people having to hunt for the pamphlet when
needed.

Building on Csíkszentmihályi's work further is Dan Pink's *Drive*, which
puts the reasons for flow down to motivational factors of autonomy,
mastery and purpose, as mentioned earlier (Pink, 2009). Pink suggests
that people are fully motivated, and therefore willing to get into a
flow state if they are autonomous (in control of their own work), if
they aspire to mastery (making the work effortless), and if they are
clear on their purpose (know why they are doing what they are doing). It
is not L&D's job to []{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_210 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 210" role="doc-pagebreak"}create autonomy, mastery and
purpose for people -- individuals can only do that for themselves,
supported and encouraged by managers -- but it is part of our role to
facilitate these states for the benefit all.

When it comes to information in an organisation, L&D and Comms must work
together, alongside line managers and senior teams, to enable flow and
drive. The ICE framework, when applied together with the advice in the
chapters and case studies in this book, reminds us how to consider our
role of achieving an effective, efficient, engaging and enjoyable
learning experience for our colleagues.

<aside aria-label="Case-Study (9.1)" class="case-study" epub:type="case-study" id="_12_CHAPTER_C09_sec_002" role="complementary">

<figure id="_11_CHAPTER_C09_UFigure_9_3" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF003.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

**ICE IN ACTION**

I worked for the UK division of a global brand as a consultant. Falling
in the top 50 of a national survey of workplaces, the organisation
prided itself on a people-first culture, with a motto for internal staff
and also for customers that was very people-focused. They had an
interesting approach to internal communication. The Comms team sat
within the People team, alongside their HR and L&D colleagues, rather
than sitting with Marketing, which is more usual in the corporate world.
Being so closely situated to the team, it was easy to view learning
through the lens of ICE. This approach really was ICE in action, as the
collaboration and support for information sharing was more seamless.

The organisation had an impressive mission for customers and staff --
they wanted to make people feel special. Internally, the message was
very well received regarding the importance of people and customers to
the organisation, and this motto permeated everything they did. I
haven't seen a people strategy more deeply embedded in any other
organisation. As a result, staff had high expectations. As an outsider
looking in, I could see that it caused a few challenges. Indeed, it
could be argued that the culture was too soft. It led to high levels of
expectation and threw up issues of how to meet those expectations.

They had a video-based learning platform, which was the right platform
for the setting, the audience and the business goals they were aiming to
solve with such a platform. However, the high levels of expectancy saw
learning and comms get out []{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_211 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 211" role="doc-pagebreak"}of kilter. With a high
expectation culture, when it came to L&D the difficulty was that
self-directed learning didn't work. In an environment where people were
given what they wanted, even without asking, staff didn't have a habit
of searching for learning, and so they didn't own their individual
development effectively.

A soft culture of high levels of expectation meant people expected
learning to land in their lap. The answer to the challenge lay in the
People team. In placing the Comms team alongside the L&D team, the
department benefited from sharing communication techniques to ensure
that learning reached the right people. The Comms team curated a
bi-weekly summary of new learning opportunities and new learning content
as a push communication to all staff. Stats on the LMS demonstrate this
approach worked well, with engagement spikes after every summary. People
were not going to the LMS themselves, but they were happy to be driven
there by great comms making it easy.

My experience with this client reminds us all that we really need to
understand the culture of our organisation in order to get learning to
land well.

One might argue that a hardening of such a soft culture would be
beneficial to the organisation. However, with its people-centric
approach to business and a strong history of parent-child relationships
with management, such a change in the culture could deconstruct the
family feel and effectiveness of the teams in place. It was a
profitable, successful business. The information in the organisation was
openly and willingly shared. A willingness to learn was part of the
everyday. By easing the blockers to learning, and working within the
cultural expectations, the story shows how sleek comms and an effective
learning offer can and should work together for an engaging learning
culture.

Doing ICE right

The ICE framework is simply a lens to look at the information flow in
your organisation and understand the edges of L&D's remit in the fine
balance of teach and tell. In summary, consider the following to apply
the framework to your setting:

1.  Reflect on your context, history and systems to consider how L&D
    helps the flow of information.

2.  L&D is foundational work; you need to get the learning structures
    right so that learning is seamless with the work. Don't be a glory
    hunter. Teach people to help themselves with seek, sense and share.

3.  Don't overcomplicate information by making it into learning when it
    simply needs communicating, not teaching.

4.  Work in harmony with information stakeholders and sharers to
    coordinate the best way to hold information aloft in your
    organisation.

5.  Identify the best method of sharing for both the information and the
    audience.

</aside>

<figure id="_11_CHAPTER_C09_UFigure_9_4" class="figure">
<p><span id="12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_212" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 212" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF004.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_12_CHAPTER_C09_UFigure_9_9" class="figure"
aria-describedby="_12_CHAPTER_C09_UFigure_9_9_details">
<p><img src="content/images/M12UF001.png"
alt="The figure shows 4 clusters of factors." /></p>
<details id="_12_CHAPTER_C09_UFigure_9_9_details">
<summary>
Figure details
</summary>
<p>The factors are as follows:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Mindset: clear thinking, not land grabbing, acknowledging
ownership, team work, open to working with others, here to help, in
service of other departments</p></li>
<li><p>Skillset: Adult Learning Theory, curation, knowledge management,
communication skills, influencing skills</p></li>
<li><p>Toolset: digital knowledge management tools, business strategy
and plans, comms plans, L and D strategy, L and D tools</p></li>
<li><p>Dataset: business K P I s, job descriptions, company history,
employee engagement scores</p></li>
</ul>
</details>
</figure>

<aside aria-label="Tip (9.2)" class="tip" id="_12_CHAPTER_C09_sec_004" role="complementary">

<figure id="_12_CHAPTER_C09_UFigure_9_5" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF005.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_12_CHAPTER_C09_UTable_9_1" class="table">
<p><a href="#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml__12_CHAPTER_C09_sec_005">Skip
table</a></p>
<div class="table" role="table" tabindex="0">
<table class="left">
<thead>
<tr>
<th scope="col"><p>Tweet</p></th>
<th scope="col"><p>Tips checklist</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><p>08-Jan-15 Curate handy snippets of info with Snipping Tool then
make a photo album of your snips, eg via Flickr or G+
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Curation doesn’t need to be arduous</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>13-Jan-15 Use a familiar company newsletter to introduce
crowdsourcing. Include weblink to intranet or LMS for replies
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Crowdsource ideas to share</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>08-Jun-15 Non-L&amp;D people don’t think our way so we need to
think their way to understand needs &amp; communicate effectively
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Think like marketing and comms experts</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>11-Jun-15 Crowdsourcing learning assets from your org engages
them in whole learning process &amp; gives stickier results
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Involve learners in their learning</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><span id="12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_213" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 213" role="doc-pagebreak"></span>18-Jun-15 Curating
knowledge is a skill for present &amp; future L&amp;D professionals.
Practice the skill with @Pinterest #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Curation is a key skills</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>21-Jul-15 Serendipitous conversations are often the best ones we
have. Capture them, nurture them, learn from them #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>As always, value conversation</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>16-Oct-15 Use your company newsletter to teach, to crowdsource
and to share. It’s a quick win to demo value. Practise what you preach.
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Walk your talk</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>27-Oct-15 To support a change in mindset strong internal
messaging on learning is key. Share the why &amp; everyone’s WIIFM
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Change mindsets through messaging</strong></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
</figure>

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (9.3)" class="box" id="_12_CHAPTER_C09_sec_005" role="complementary">

<figure id="_12_CHAPTER_C09_UFigure_9_6" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF006.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Where is information generated, stored, shared, held, blocked in
    your organisation?

-   What is the culture of your organisation around knowledge and
    information?

-   What gains kudos -- sharing or stockpiling information?

-   Can information keep moving in your organisation? Where are the
    blockers?

-   How do people get their 'how do I' questions answered? Can that
    process be made any easier?

-   Can people think for themselves? Are they self-directed learners?
    Does L&D help or hinder that?

-   Do you have the skills you need to do the right thing for your
    audience and organisation when it comes to information -- curation,
    communication, marketing?

-   []{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_214 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 214"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}Are you aware of how you work in harmony with
    others?

-   Has your organisation got the foundations right to enable
    information to flow where it is needed, when it is needed?

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (9.4)" class="box" id="_12_CHAPTER_C09_sec_006" role="complementary">

<figure id="_12_CHAPTER_C09_UFigure_9_7" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF007.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Make sense of information in your context.

-   Be clear on your remit.

-   Share information with others in a way they need.

-   Be clear on what self-directed means to your learners.

-   Review your learning offer to check for over-complications.

-   Check your balance of teach and tell.

-   Learn from Internal Comms.

-   Learn from Marketing.

-   Plan a campaign for learning.

-   Curate appropriate content appropriately.

-   Seek good stories.

-   Make sense of your learners' motivation.

-   Share information out of people's heads.

</aside>

::: {#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml__12_CHAPTER_C09_sec_007 .section .references .bibliography aria-label="THE LIBRARY LIST (9.5)" role="doc-bibliography"}
<figure id="_12_CHAPTER_C09_UFigure_9_8" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF008.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Beevers, K, Rea, A and Hayden, D (2019), *Learning and Development
    Practice in the Workplace*, Kogan Page, London

-   []{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_215 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 215"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}Brann, A (2013) *Make Your Brain Work*, Kogan
    Page, London

-   CIPD (2020) Learning Theories for the Workplace, *CIPD* \[online\]
    [[www.cipd.co.uk/knowledge/strategy/development/learning-theories-factsheet]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.cipd.co.uk/knowledge/strategy/development/learning-theories-factsheet)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/S95A-CJQ5]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/S95A-CJQ5))

-   Collins, S (2016) *Neuroscience for Learning and Development*, Kogan
    Page, London

-   Csíkszentmihályi, M (2002) *Flow, Rider, London*

-   Csíkszentmihályi, M (2010) Flow, *YouTube* \[online\]
    [[www.youtube.com/watch?v=JjliwSJGDiU]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JjliwSJGDiU)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/5F3J-3FGW]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/5F3J-3FGW))

-   Davachi, L, Kiefer, T, Rock, D and Rock, L (2010) Learning that
    lasts through AGES, *NeuroLeadership Journal*. Issue 3.
    [[www.neuroleadership.com/portfolio-items/learning-that-lasts-through-ages-vol-3/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.neuroleadership.com/portfolio-items/learning-that-lasts-through-ages-vol-3/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/ML37-H82F]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/ML37-H82F))

-   Hendy, M (2018) What if everything we know about 'work' is about to
    change? *Ted Talks* \[online\]
    [[www.ted.com/talks/mark_hendy_what_if_everything_we_know_about_work_is_about_to_change]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.ted.com/talks/mark_hendy_what_if_everything_we_know_about_work_is_about_to_change)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/BY2R-7GDE]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/BY2R-7GDE))

-   Heutogogy Community of Practice (n.d.) What is Heutagogy? *Heutogogy
    Community of Practice* \[online\]
    [[www.heutagogycop.wordpress.com/history-of-heutagogy/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.heutagogycop.wordpress.com/history-of-heutagogy/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/K5XP-9YS8]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/K5XP-9YS8)).

-   James, D (2016) Learning & Development On Demand, *Looop* \[online\]
    [[www.looop.co/articles/learning-development-on-demand-2/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.looop.co/articles/learning-development-on-demand-2/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/SPA7-MUUB]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/SPA7-MUUB))

-   Jarche, H (2014) The Seek, Sense and Share Framework,
    [[*jarche.com*]{.url-hyperlink}](https://jarche.com) \[online\] 2
    October.
    [[www.jarche.com/2014/02/the-seek-sense-share-framework/]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.jarche.com/2014/02/the-seek-sense-share-framework/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/ECD7-QRAV]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/ECD7-QRAV))

-   Lancaster, A (2019) *Driving Performance Through Learning*, Kogan
    Page, London

-   Learning Theories (2017) Knowles' Adult Learning Theories:
    Andragogy, *Learning Theories* \[online\]
    [[www.learning-theories.com/andragogy-adult-learning-theory-knowles.html]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.learning-theories.com/andragogy-adult-learning-theory-knowles.html)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/AH7T-K7W9]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/AH7T-K7W9))

-   Meurre, J M J and Dros, J (2015) Replication and Analysis of
    Ebbinghaus' Forgetting Curve, *Plos One* \[online\]
    [[www.journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0120644]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0120644)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/5E5X-ALMM]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/5E5X-ALMM))

-   Nancarrow, I (2019) Campaign learning: what is it and why does it
    tackle eLearning challenges? *Training Zone* \[online\]
    [[www.trainingzone.co.uk/develop/talent/campaign-learning-what-is-it-and-why-does-it-tackle-elearning-challenges]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.trainingzone.co.uk/develop/talent/campaign-learning-what-is-it-and-why-does-it-tackle-elearning-challenges)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/D4ZC-LVM2]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/D4ZC-LVM2))

-   Pink, D (2009) *Drive*, Canongate Books, Edinburgh

-   Stodd, J (2016) *The Social Leadership Handbook*, 2^nd^ edition, Sea
    Salt Publishing, London
:::

::: {#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml__12_CHAPTER_C09_sec_008 .section .endnotes aria-labelledby="_12_CHAPTER_C09_h1_008"}
# []{#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml_page_216 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 216" role="doc-pagebreak"}Notes {#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml__12_CHAPTER_C09_h1_008 .title}

[1](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml__12_CHAPTER_C09_Endnote_9_1_reference) This
type of information support and teaching is very effective for
accessibility as shown in the case studies here:
[[www.wearehowdoi.com/for-employers]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.wearehowdoi.com/for-employers)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/83A4-7ZG3]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/83A4-7ZG3))

[2](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml__12_CHAPTER_C09_Endnote_9_2_reference) For
further information on Knowles and androgogy, see
[[www.learning-theories.com/andragogy-adult-learning-theory-knowles.html]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.learning-theories.com/andragogy-adult-learning-theory-knowles.html)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/AH7T-K7W9]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/AH7T-K7W9))
:::

[]{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

<div>

[]{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_217 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 217"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[[10]{.ordinal
.ordinal}](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_13_CHAPTER_C10_sec_001)

# [EPC -- Environment, Permission and Culture](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_13_CHAPTER_C10_sec_001) {#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml__13_CHAPTER_C10_h1_001 .title}

Kairos Modern Learning's framework for building a learning culture

</div>

<figure id="_13_CHAPTER_C10_Figure_10_1" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M13NF001.png"
alt="The figure shows a simple flowchart." /></p>
<details id="_13_CHAPTER_C10_Figure_10_1-details">
<summary>
Figure 10.1 details
</summary>
<p>The label culture sits at the apex of a triangle. At the base are two
components labeled environment and permission with arrows pointing to
each other and to the culture label.</p>
</details>
<figcaption><p><a
href="#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml#loi_13_CHAPTER_C10_Figure_10_1"><span
class="label">Figure</span> <span
class="ordinal">10.1</span> <strong>EPC
Framework</strong></a></p></figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="_13_CHAPTER_C10_UFigure_10_1" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF001.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

Three things are central to a solid, successful L&D department:
environment, permission and culture. If you get these structural
foundations right, you stand a much better chance at landing L&D in
practice. Part of the challenge for L&D is that we usually don't address
these at all. We create []{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_218 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 218" role="doc-pagebreak"}a great blended learning
programme with interactive workbooks which address business issues
directly as identified by data and consultation. Yet the learning fails,
because shop floor workers don't have access to computers to join in the
learning. Or we create a great video-based induction programme that
nobody watches because their line managers don't think they should be
watching TV at work. Or we create job aids to give out at the end of a
face-to-face learning day, but we get 40 per cent cancellations on the
day because people are 'too busy to attend'.

When the foundations are not in place to allow the learning offer to
succeed, we may as well pack up and go home before we start. In my
consultancy experience, I have learnt that it's hugely important that we
address environment, permission and culture in order to make our
strategy work, in order to make our stakeholder engagement effective,
and in order to understand what we should be producing and evaluating.
How can we know what we are supposed to deliver in learning if we don't
understand the arenas we are working within? Don't begin to consider
social learning, digital learning or blended learning until you have a
clear view of these three arenas and how they affect learning in your
organisation. Without the right environment, the right permissions and a
tangible and effective company culture, whatever learning you offer will
never be as effective as it could be.

This chapter does not focus on company culture or culture change per se;
rather, it is about building a learning culture within a company
culture. I do not often talk about a learning culture as a separate
entity to company culture; they are inextricably linked. However, in the
context of this framework, environment and permission are driving
towards a learning culture, rather than shifting an entire company
culture, which is outside of L&D's remit and more into OD's working
space. For more on company culture itself, see *The Power of Company
Culture* by Chris Dyer, who suggests culture is a '...combination of the
easily seen ideals... combined with the harder-to-see norms, behaviours,
languages, beliefs and systems'. (Dyer, 2018). If we don't understand
this combination in our own setting and how that impacts on learning, we
are only seeing some of the picture and potentially setting our learning
up to fail.

I believe a company does not even own its own culture. Culture comes
from the people and history of an organisation. A company does not exist
without its people and purpose, and thus company culture cannot exist as
an entity on its own. Culture is a reflection of the people who work in
a company.

What about environment and permission? Where do they fit in? In this
context, we can define the three components of the EPC framework as
follows:

-   []{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_219 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 219"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}Environment -- the learning environment
    encourages us to think about how learning will be accessed and
    whether that is appropriate to the topic and situation. It
    encompasses both physical and online, and both hardware and
    software.

-   Permission -- the permission for learning in an organisation must
    not be taken for granted. To support learning, we need to address
    what people are allowed to do, or not do.

-   Culture -- company culture is that ingrained, innate knowing set of
    norms for how work is done, and impacts how learning takes place.

If you are developing learning solutions to meet a business need, you
have to have the right foundations in place to make those solutions
work. The EPC framework reminds us to start planning for learning
solutions whilst thinking about these three important arenas. You should
identify the impact of EPC in your company, reflect on it, and turn it
to your advantage to improve outcomes for L&D. Investigate, examine and
review ways of ensuring that the environment your learners learn in is
appropriate, that the permissions are in place for them to learn. and
that the culture of your organisation is receptive to your learning
strategy. Without these key tenets in place, L&D departments may provide
the best solutions and be left to wonder why they are not working.

<figure id="_13_CHAPTER_C10_UFigure_10_2" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF002.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

[Context of the EPC
framework](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_13_CHAPTER_C10_h3_001)

First, let's look at the context for needing this framework. What we are
ultimately talking about with EPC is the ability of learners to apply
their learning in the workplace. You might think that is a strange thing
to say -- surely it's a given that people are able to apply their
learning in the workplace? That's the whole point of learning, right?
Yes it is, but what I have learnt throughout my experience is that you
must never assume. Never assume that there is permission to learn. Never
assume that the right technology is in place or the right environment is
present in order for people to learn.

We need to help people know that it is not just okay to learn, but good
to learn. We need to be explicit about encouraging good learning
behaviour. []{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_220 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 220" role="doc-pagebreak"}We need to engineer that
behaviour through thinking about the environment, permission and
culture.

Something L&D professionals need to remember-- and this is a hard pill
for some of us to swallow -- is that we are passionate about people
development, but that is rarely the case for other people in the
business. They just want to get on with their jobs. They want to know
the information they need to know in order to perform well. And line
managers? They are not always that interested in developing their
people. What they're really focused on is fulfilling KPIs, and rarely,
very rarely, do they have KPIs that say 'develop your team'. And yet,
what do line managers do? A core part of their job is managing people,
which should include people development.

What this means is that L&D can be pushing on a closed door. You need to
think about how to open that door and keep it open, which is where
consideration of the three foundational aspects outlined in the EPC
framework comes in. Therefore, reflect on your context and be prepared
to do work to adapt, or change, your solutions. In doing so, however,
never forget the primary reason L&D exists -- to help people to perform
better at work. Be cautious about changing your learning solutions to
adapt to a poor EPC, especially if the adaptation is the detriment of
the learning experience for the learner. This is why we have to address
these fundamentals before we offer solutions. For example, if our
adaptation is to record and share webinar learning because there is
little support from line managers for attending live learning webinars,
we are working around a flawed system. In my experience, webinar
recordings are rarely watched and digested, plus there is often no way
to ask questions after the live event, and thus learning impact is very
limited. In such an example, your time is better spent by, first,
understanding why people don't attend live learning, and, second,
garnering support from line managers for attendance at the events.

[E --
Environment](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_13_CHAPTER_C10_h3_002)

To review the EPC framework in a practical sense, we will start with the
environment. There are two environments in fact -- the physical learning
space and the digital learning space, which includes both hardware and
software.

[The physical
space](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_13_CHAPTER_C10_h4_001)

Let's concentrate on the physical learning space first. If you are
offering classroom learning, then think about that classroom
environment. []{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_221 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 221" role="doc-pagebreak"}Traditionally, the classroom
has often been the boardroom of an organisation or a hotel room, if
you're lucky enough to go off site. Are these spaces conducive to
learning? They do not usually resemble the workplace that the learners
actually work in, which means those learners have to work hard at
applying their learning experience to their work. If the learning space
is wildly different from the working environment, then that may get in
the way of the learning. That is not to say that the learning
environment always has to replicate the working environment, but you
need to think carefully about this -- after all, imagine trying to teach
a pilot to fly without actually putting them in an aeroplane.

Therefore, consider the physical learning space, how it relates to the
learning, and whether it will help or hinder the learning to land.
There's lots of good research out there that demonstrates how important
the physical space is in terms of helping people to learn. Paint
colours, for example, can play a big part in determining the mood in a
room, enhancing or diminishing people's ability to concentrate and think
creatively. A supermarket learning academy in the UK was redesigned with
colour therapy in mind, and has break-out spaces, pot plants, writing on
the walls -- all aimed at supporting the creative, thinking process.

In contrast, think about those uniform, bland, stark hotel rooms that
we've all sat in during training. Are they conducive to learning and
creativity? If you want people to think differently and do things
differently, is the environment they are in helping them to do that? If
they are not nice spaces to be in, they are not going to be nice spaces
to learn in, and they certainly will not give people the sense that
things can be different. Some hotels have taken this on board and now
offer conference spaces that help creativity and learning flow, such as
Ibis Styles, which offer unique creative, quirky, interesting spaces in
their
hotels[]{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml__13_CHAPTER_C10_Endnote_10_1_reference
.anchor}^[1](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml__13_CHAPTER_C10_Endnote_10_1)^.

Don't be afraid to shake things up a bit -- walking meetings are much
more common now than they were a few years ago, so think about how
walking meetings or learning outside could be incorporated into your
learning solutions. By taking people out of the normal, by doing things
differently, you help people step out of their comfort zones and enable
them to explore different possibilities too. You need to help people
stretch themselves and think beyond what they already know. I took
Virtual College to the outdoor education centre Nell
Bank[]{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml__13_CHAPTER_C10_Endnote_10_2_reference
.anchor}^[2](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml__13_CHAPTER_C10_Endnote_10_2)^ in the
Yorkshire countryside to meet with industry experts in an entirely
non-corporate setting. The setting choice was deliberately designed to
shake up thinking and expectations. Never underestimate the value of the
right environment.

[]{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_222 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 222"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[The digital
space](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_13_CHAPTER_C10_h4_002)

There are two elements to consider in the digital space -- the hardware
available and the software technical skills. Assumptions around digital
spaces and skills can go one of two ways; success or failure. Worse
still, if you make a mistake, people are hindered or excluded from
learning.

Huge assumptions are made around access to hardware. Digital poverty
does still exist, as shown by the impact on working situations during
the coronavirus pandemic in 2020. Not everyone has access to good
broadband, for example, particularly if they live in a rural area. When
designing L&D solutions, we need to think about the hardware that people
might have or not have. Rather than making assumptions, ask your teams
what they have access to, and shape your learning solutions around that
where possible.

The second element is technical skills. Again, it's very easy for people
to make assumptions about technical skills, especially as consumer grade
technology has outstripped business-based technology for a number of
years. However, not everyone has access to either the equipment or the
opportunity to learn. People may generally have the skills they need to
navigate work tech, but just because someone is savvy in one piece of
software, doesn't mean they are savvy in another. L&D can add value by
never making assumptions. Always make sure people know what they need to
know in order to use technology properly and effectively. And if you
don't assume, then you minimise the embarrassment people might feel if
they don't have a particular skill.

Again, when we all went into lockdown due to coronavirus, a lot of
assumptions were made about technical skills. Suddenly, whole rafts of
the population were using Zoom, Microsoft Teams and other digital tools,
and the assumption was that people knew how to use them and how to
translate what they did offline to online. People adapted pretty well
because they had to, but there were teething issues for some, which is
to be expected given the numbers of people involved. L&D had a role to
play here in terms of making sure that everyone had the technical skills
to cope in this new situation, to know what to do and what not to do
with the tech, and in ensuring no-one felt embarrassed to ask for help.
Southwark Council, for example, provided laptops and learning support to
enable their workforce to work from home for the first time
(Clark-Johnney, 2020). This was both the right thing to do and
necessary. That the L&D team were able to act so quickly and
successfully is admirable.

[]{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_223 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 223"
role="doc-pagebreak"}So often managers don't ask people whether they
know how to use something; they just assume they do and leave them to
get on with it. But, my mantra is that it's better to tell someone twice
than not tell them at all. I'd rather share with somebody how to use
something even if they already know, rather than them not know and feel
embarrassed about asking. When I joined CIPD, I had come from years of
using Google's G-Suite. To be faced with a Microsoft 365 suite was
daunting at first. I asked a lot of questions and many colleagues were
shocked at the level of simplicity I needed. It is a similar story for
people moving from Mac to Windows and vice versa.

[Getting environments
right](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_13_CHAPTER_C10_h4_003)

Even big organisations make basic errors because they forget to think
about all the elements in a learning environment. Typically, the
hardware piece is forgotten. I had a retailer as a consultancy client
that brought me in to implement a software as a service product they
were excited to have bought. It was a video-based learning tool, bought
by head office staff who sit at desks and use computers all day.
However, there was a huge problem with implementing the product. The
retailers didn't have access to anything other than a DOS-based till
system in store. The hardware and software simply weren't compatible.
The head office staff had not considered the environment of the learners
at all, and so the learning tool became obsolete.

What can L&D do to avoid making mistakes like these? First, go check out
the 'classroom' learners will be learning in. Is it fit for purpose? By
classroom, of course, I mean the widest possible interpretations of this
in the context of physical and digital learning environments. Second,
speak to all stakeholders around the project and get a really clear
image of what you are trying to build, and check whether it will work in
that context. If you don't know what you need to know about the tech
solution, don't be embarrassed to upgrade your own skillset. Have good
conversations with the technical team in your organisation so that you
understand the infrastructure, the technical capability and skill behind
the use of these tools. Finally, run a tiny trial in a sandbox version
of the proposed tool. This will give you the data and experience you
need to make good decisions about your learning options.

With that data and information, engage with your senior stakeholders.
Find out how much respect they have for digital learning and physical
learning spaces. If you say 'I want to spend money on moving to a
different learning environment and it's more than I would spend on a
classroom facilitation []{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_224 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 224" role="doc-pagebreak"}in a hotel', expect to be
asked to justify that spend. Would those stake­holders accept it or
question the value? You always need to be able to justify your learning
spend, but particularly if stakeholders are sceptical about what you are
suggesting. Pre-empt the conversation by considering how you can help
them see the value of moving learning to a more creative space, or why
having to buy tablets for everyone to access online learning makes
sense. If they cannot, you need to go back and re-address the situation
again, as it could mean that culturally things aren't right for your
learning to change yet.

[Supporting people to
learn](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_13_CHAPTER_C10_h4_004)

Creating the right environment also requires you to think about how you
support people to have the time and mental space to learn. Are there
moments of downtime during the day when you're expecting people to
engage with e-learning? Have work rotas been amended to enable people to
carry out the learning? Is it a noisy office they will be learning in?
Will work and life be going on as normal all around them as they try to
concentrate? Will there be interruptions by peers? Managers? Even if
it's digital learning they are doing, you still have to consider the
physical surroundings they will be inhabiting.

And if it's a physical learning space, then how does digital fit into
that? Are people allowed to use their phones in a classroom environment
-- to connect with each other, to research, to network via their
mobiles? If phones are allowed within the context of work, then it makes
for a better and more realistic learning environment. It is important
that you establish ground rules together early on as a learning cohort,
but ideally as a whole organisation, about how to deal with tech and
trust.

Can phones be a distraction in the context of your learning environment,
even when people don't mean for them to be? Can people bring their whole
selves into a physical classroom if they are worried about a phone call
from a sick relative or whether that terribly important email has been
sent to them yet? Understanding your learners, their needs and context
is all part of exploring the Environment part of the EPC framework.

You may have limited resources that impact on your environment choices.
Having an abundance of resource and an abundance of budget will make it
much easier to change the learning environment, but you can still do
really good learning without an abundance of resource. Andrew Jacobs
told me that when he worked in a local authority, like many, he had his
learning budget cut, so he got library cards for his colleagues. They
shared the same []{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_225 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 225" role="doc-pagebreak"}building as the library, so
with some lateral thinking, barriers to resources can be worked through.
Doing a lot with very little is possible with creative thinking.

[The actual
environment](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_13_CHAPTER_C10_h4_005)

I would like to throw another element into the mix -- the actual
environmental impact of your learning on our planet. Are you still
printing reams and reams of workbooks or joining instructions? Are you
still sending things out in the post? These activities could be
beneficial for learners, but you need to think carefully about the
environmental footprint your learning is leaving in the world as you
embark upon them. Have you asked whether your learners need printed
copies, or is printed just what you have always done, and therefore what
they have come to expect? You should think about it because you care as
an individual, but also because learners are increasingly concerned
about their own environmental footprint. Many a workbook has been
printed to be placed in a drawer, where it gathers dust until someone
moves desk or moves company. So why not create an interactive
hyperlinked pdf instead? Or offer options to people -- a printed
workbook or an electronic version. For a longer learning programme, it
could be a better option to provide your learner with a tablet loaded
with all their digital learning needs rather than printing anything at
all.

[P --
Permission](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_13_CHAPTER_C10_h3_003)

The next arena in the EPC framework is permission to learn, particularly
within those two learning spaces that we talked about in the environment
section -- the physical learning space and the digital learning space.
The permissions will be slightly different in these two settings, but
you definitely still need to set expectations and never assume that
permission is a given. Don't assume that people feel they have
permission for learning, whether it's offline or online.

[Permission
online](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_13_CHAPTER_C10_h4_006)

You have to work a lot harder in the online space when it comes to
permission. The classroom learning environment is very well established
-- people know why they are there, what is expected of them, and how to
behave because it mirrors the environment they would likely have learnt
in at school. For example, if you put your hand up, then chances are you
want to ask a question (or say you need the bathroom). But when it's
only you at the []{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_226 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 226" role="doc-pagebreak"}end of a camera, how do
people identify that they need a break or that they have a question? You
need to help people with explicit instructions on how to communicate in
an online environment. Sometimes, digital tools have features that
replicate those actions that we automatically do offline, such as a
hands up feature. But don't assume that everyone knows about or
understands what the online hands up feature means.

To help people know how to behave in the digital space, you do have to
engineer it, even down to small talk. If you put a group of humans in a
classroom, they will chat to each other or increasingly look at their
phones, without thinking twice about it. But if you put a group of
people together in an online space, do they necessarily know how to
behave? Do they know they are allowed to talk to each other in the chat?
Do they know how to use the chat function as well as speaking? You might
have to help people ease into these behaviours. Make sure you spend time
at the beginning establishing meaning and behaviours.

[Modelling
behaviour](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_13_CHAPTER_C10_h4_007)

Coronavirus has accelerated our understanding of how to interact online.
Zoom went from being something that some people used some of the time to
being something that a lot of people used a lot of the time. People may
have been used to webcams, using chat boxes, and going on forums to have
conversations asynchronously over a period of time. But our
understanding of what was possible in live online learning made a huge
leap throughout 2020. Many online behaviours have been normalised as a
result, but that doesn't mean you can sit back and assume everything is
ticking along nicely. You still need to be explicit in your permission
in the digital learning space. You need to encourage the behaviour you
want to see. The best way to do that is to model the required behaviour
in those spaces. For example, if you set up a forum, you need to be on
the forum yourself, getting advocates in there, and behaving in the way
you want others to behave. If you want people to pitch in and answer
each others' questions, then do that. If you want it to provide
peer-to-peer support, then encourage that and praise those who do. Know
what you want these forums to do and then facilitate the behaviour. Be
clear and explicit in your aims and expectations, and give people the
guidance to follow.

If a CEO were to walk by and see someone watching a TED talk at their
desk, would they say 'That looks great, what are you learning? Is it
worth sharing?' Or would they say "What are you doing watching TV at
work?' Consider what your CEO would say in that situation. What about
your []{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_227 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 227"
role="doc-pagebreak"}senior or middle managers? Understanding this will
tell you much of what you need to know about the EPC situation in your
organisation when it comes to permission to learn.

People need to know they are allowed to learn digitally at work. They
need to feel comfortable. The organisation needs to recognise and
understand that it is as valid a mode of learning as sitting in a
course. It's not a cheap alternative. It's not less of an investment
than more traditional forms of learning. It's important to make time for
it, and to protect that online learning time. To plan for and enable
this effectively, ask these questions: Is the learning able to happen
uninterrupted or do colleagues think it's okay to interrupt people when
they are watching a video, on a webinar, or doing e-learning? If you are
learning digitally, how do colleagues know you not to interrupt you?
What happens beyond the learning?

I've heard some great success stories of people making digital learning
really explicit. At one client, people wore a cap when they were
learning online. The 'I'm learning' cap was a signal in two ways. First,
don't interrupt me. Second, managers could visibly see who was making
time for learning and how often learning was taking place. In building a
learning culture, it also helped people to ask colleagues what learning
they were doing. It became normalised to learn online with this visual
cue, spreading the message that learning is important. You could, for
example, use flags displayed on people's desks in a similar way, saying
'I'm on a webinar, don't disturb me please. Ask me later what I've
learnt'.

These are just a couple of ways you can normalise behaviours around
digital learning. In the first instance, though, you absolutely have to
understand what permissions need to be addressed to create such a normal
learning culture.

[Enable creative
thinking](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_13_CHAPTER_C10_h4_013)

You may find that permission is a huge part of your business case for
moving away from face-to-face to more modern creative learning. It is
important to address any issues in order to be able to offer more
creative, outcomes-based learning. I think L&Ders sometimes get stuck on
fulfilling narrow learning objectives with learning interventions and
don't always see the benefits and outcomes that going through the
learning process itself offer to learners.

One creative thinking opportunity could be to go to a museum or an art
gallery in order to influence people to think differently about their
work. If that seems too outlandish for permission in your organisation,
perhaps []{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_228 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 228" role="doc-pagebreak"}starting with an Unconference
(see [Chapter 8](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml)) might be a gentler, productive
first step.

A really useful exhibition for UK-based L&D teams to learn from is the
Designer Maker User exhibition at the Design Museum in
London[]{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml__13_CHAPTER_C10_Endnote_10_3_reference
.anchor}^[3](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml__13_CHAPTER_C10_Endnote_10_3)^. It is
an exhibition that looks at the development of modern design through
three interconnected roles of the designer, manufacturer, and the end
user. Andy Lancaster first took me there as part of a team meeting, a
practice he often used to encourage inspiration and broader thinking.
Consider how getting tickets to places and events like this would be
viewed in your organisation. Would you get permission in your
organisation for you and your L&D colleagues to attend such a venue
without a direct learning objective in mind, just an expected outcome of
inspiration, fresh thinking, or a new perspective? Opening minds to
possibilities, offering creative thinking experiences, learning to be in
the moment are all part of building a learning culture.

You could take your senior leadership team to the Churchill War Rooms in
London in order to facilitate discussions about planning and the
execution of strategy. You could take your sales team to the Tate Modern
in Liverpool to consider how to sell different types of product through
abstract art. Or go to the Museum of Science and Industry in Manchester
for innovation inspiration for your tech team. Whilst these are UK-based
examples, you are limited only by your imagination. Check out what is
available near you. Considering the permissions situation before putting
on such different types of learning events is vital. You can only ensure
success by playing into company culture. However, sometimes we need to
consider how we shift that culture if it is stifling learning for our
organisation.

[The consequences of not addressing
permission](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_13_CHAPTER_C10_h4_008)

There are real consequences of not addressing the permission question.
The reality is people not engaging with any learning -- because that is
not 'their job' -- and people working in fear. Lack of investment in
people results in an unmotivated workforce, reducing productivity,
resulting in poor performance. It is a race to the bottom.

Here's an example:

<aside aria-label="EXAMPLE (10.1)" class="example" epub:type="practice" id="_13_CHAPTER_C10_sec_002" role="complementary">

EXAMPLE

**'**I thought I heard you laughing. Be quiet, this is a place of work,
not a playground.'

[]{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_229 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 229"
role="doc-pagebreak"}These are actual words my supervisor said to me in
the early 1990s when I had one of my first jobs with a major UK high
street bank. I was frequently told off for laughing at work, especially
with my colleague, Cathy. She was hilarious. She had to be; her job was
to deal with deceased people's account closure. She had to keep things
light-hearted or she would have struggled emotionally to do her job.

The message to me as a young, impressionable worker was clear: work is
serious, work is not for pleasure. Consequently, learning to do your job
was serious too, and most certainly not for pleasure. My stern
supervisor would stand over me and bark if I did something wrong. Hand
sorting cheques needed the specific skill of knowing your alphabet and
the ability to move your wrists quickly. So although it wasn't
particularly technical work, my supervisor was embodying the culture of
the company, and the one in which she had also learned to do the job, so
she saw no reason to change her approach.

</aside>

There are so many elements of typical organisations in this snapshot of
my own working life that I'm sure many of you can recognise. Serious
workplaces filled with serious people learning and doing serious work in
a way that it has always been done. Until it's not. All change.

Permission to speak, Sir. Permission denied. Do workplaces like this
really still exist? There may now be a pool table in the office, but the
underlying hierarchical culture of permission may sadly still be in
place. Reflecting on the EPC framework will keep L&D from sleep walking
into such a culture because of a well-decorated office. Meanwhile
without shifting your reality to face into your workplace permission
culture, you will struggle to innovate in learning successfully.

[C -- Culture](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_13_CHAPTER_C10_h3_004)

The third element of this model, as you now know, is culture. You have
to understand your company's approach to a learning culture in order to
understand how learning will be accepted in your organisation.

[The way things are done around
here](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_13_CHAPTER_C10_h4_009)

Consider learning within your organisation, the way that things 'are
done around here'. What you do needs to reflect how people within the
organisation behave and how the organisation itself behaves. If your
learning offer is []{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_230 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 230" role="doc-pagebreak"}at odds with that, it is less
likely to succeed. You can either modify your learning offer or you need
to tackle the culture and behaviours first so that your organisation is
culturally ready to accept your new learning interventions. For example,
say you want to push ownership of learning out to people, yet those very
same people have to ask permission to take a break. Do you think them
taking ownership of their learning will work? Is it realistic?

If you are in an environment where people have to ask permission to
speak and that permission is denied, you are not going to land a
co-created, collaborative, blended learning programme until you address
the permission issues first. Yet you may not have the authority, the
permission to even address such cultural issues. It may be that you need
an outside voice such as a consultant or new manager to come in as a new
ally and raise the questions that you cannot. Culture shift,
organisational design and development, and systems thinking are usually
all outside of L&D's remit. However, without these strong foundations,
L&D will struggle to innovate in the way learners need us to, whatever
your industry, to help them perform in today's challenging world. So we
need to bring them into our thinking. We need to collaborate with the
people in our organisation responsible for these arenas. We need to rise
up, not dumb down.

[Shifting
culture](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_13_CHAPTER_C10_h4_010)

Start with your OD colleagues to align your thinking. Chat also to HR
and find out what voice they have for influencing culture shift. Check
in with anyone else in your context who impacts on culture. Remember the
influencers we talked about in [Chapter 3](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml) and
chat to them too, as they can have a direct impact on culture. Also,
look at the language in your organisation. If your stakeholders want to
foster collaborative working and you suggest collaborative learning
experiences, yet yours is a top-down, hierarchical organisation that is
focused on profit above people, it's just not going to work. Everything
is at odds. Worse still, if this scenario plays out, it is likely L&D
will take the blame for not making it work. The right L&D intervention
would be doomed to fail before it started because the environment,
permission and culture were not ready.

But do not despair; you can make it work. It just takes time, and
progress will be slower. Make small changes. Set up small trials with a
few willing stakeholders to gather evidence for later sharing. Really
get under the skin of your organisation and understand the climate you
are operating in. This is the first step to shifting your learning
culture. If you are in an organisation that doesn't have time for
learning, and all the language in the organisation
[]{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_231 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 231"
role="doc-pagebreak"}supports that view, you have to layer on the value
of bite-size, piecemeal learning that plays into the 'I've no time'
culture. Start there, gather impact data, and use that to demonstrate
that learning has value. From there you can show progress, albeit small,
to bring about change towards building a more inclusive learning
culture. You need to create space so people do have time for learning
and recognise the value of it.

If you ignore the cultural situation you operate in and create great
learning -- fantastic learning even -- but the organisation isn't one
that values or makes time for learning, then people won't be released
into those spaces to do the learning, people will not care about it, and
people will not see your work as in anyway successful. Andrew Jacobs
articulates this really well in a model that he calls Skill, Will,
Resource and Authority (Jacobs, 2015). He talks about the sweet spot,
where the skill, the will, the resource and the authority come together.
He talks about authority in the same way that I talk about permission,
and goes on to consider how the willingness of people to want to learn
comes into play as well -- it is almost like they give themselves
permission to learn.

[We've always done it this
way](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_13_CHAPTER_C10_h4_011)

Another way culture can impact learning is when you have a workforce
that has done the same job for many a year and they have no willingness
to learn new things. They may even consider they have nothing new to
learn. As L&Ders, of course, we know there is always something to learn,
so we need to address this lack of learning culture that stems from the
workforce.

For me, these situations are about finding pain points. I worked with an
international beverage company whose senior team wanted their factory
trainers to embrace digital learning. The trainers did not share the
vision and were not interested in making the change, claiming digital
learning was not for them nor their factory worker audience. They
claimed they didn't use or trust the internet or social media. They were
a tough audience, so we took a break. Over coffee, I encouraged a casual
chat about holidays -- how we find them, book them, go on them, share
them and remember them. It became very obvious to everyone that holidays
would be very different without digital. It was a gentle way to address
their real fears for the lack of willingness to move to digital
learning. We continued with a much more honest conversation on why they
feared change. Of course, they were worried about their jobs being taken
over by the bots.

To get to that stage of cultural awareness and permission to be honest,
we needed to change the environment. Chatting over coffee was the
informal []{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_232 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 232" role="doc-pagebreak"}setting in which to show that
'we've always done it this way' doesn't mean we always need to do it
this way. The holiday chat provided a reassurance that the trainers were
already very digitally savvy and doing this anyway. What they were
saying regarding digital learning was incongruent to what was actually
going on, but implied that there were concerns that they had not been
initially willing to explain. There is always a way to address the fear
of change if we look carefully. The EPC framework can help surface those
conversations.

[Reflect on the
whole](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_13_CHAPTER_C10_h3_005)

The EPC framework involves your whole organisation getting behind what
is needed for successful learning. You will need to have really good
discussions with people and get a really good understanding of the lay
of the land now, and what needs to change for the future. What do
environment and permission even mean in the context of learning for
other people? Have they got the equipment they need? Have they got
access to learning when it is right for them? How is it right for them?
Does their manager support their learning? Permission may seem implied
for learning: if you are sent on a course, surely it is expected you are
allowed to go to the event or embed change when you return. This is not
always the case, so never assume. For example, why do people feel it is
ok to cancel course attendance at the last minute because they are too
busy to learn? This is all wrapped up tightly in the culture of an
organisation and how learning is valued and perceived within that
culture.

By its very nature, the EPC framework brings into focus a holistic view
of a whole organisation. By working through the framework, we can see
how learning wraps around a whole business. Using the lenses EPC offers
to L&D, we can reflect on how our organisation appreciates and
understands the value L&D brings. I maintain that we cannot learn deeply
and effectively without knowing what value the organisation considers
L&D to bring.

There are two potential challenges to reflecting on the organisation as
a complete entity. First, does L&D have a voice to address the whole
organisation? This is usually the domain of OD. Second, does the whole
business care about learning? As we've seen from [Chapters
2](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml), [3](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml) and
[4](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml), this isn't always the case. Is it, then, our
job to convert everyone to banging the L&D drum? I genuinely do believe
in cake theory for situations like this: if we make great learning that
works and impacts business problems, people will come. But if we make
great learning without addressing the environment,
[]{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_233 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 233"
role="doc-pagebreak"}permission and culture we are operating in, they
will not, in fact, they cannot come.

This is not an easy or quick fix. This is deep-seated, deep-rooted,
systemic work which requires big thinking. But it is also very much
worth it; it really will make your learning offer so much stronger. You
will have an impact on people's work and performance. You may also
influence your organisation to change the way they do things for the
better. This is the work and L&D needs to do it.

[What is next for
L&D?](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_13_CHAPTER_C10_h3_006)

If you don't consider the impact of Environment, Permission and Culture
on L&D, your practice will perpetuate the situation L&D is stuck in,
despite that now being past its sell-by date. Society and business still
dictate that classroom learning equals professional development. Throw
in the odd e-learning session and a nice chat, and that's it. That's all
we have. It remains to be seen what the impact of Covid-19 has on these
entrenched views of workplace learning. I believe learning cannot happen
in the way it has happened in the past because the present is different,
and the future will continue to be so. Therefore, we need to challenge
the perceptions of L&D in organisations. By getting to the foundations
of what makes your organisation unique, what makes it work effectively,
you can be sure that your learning offer will be appropriate to the
context, received with open arms, and you will establish what needs to
change, and how. This is within your gift.

<aside aria-label="Case-Study (10.2)" class="case-study" epub:type="case-study" id="_13_CHAPTER_C10_sec_003" role="complementary">

<figure id="_13_CHAPTER_C10_UFigure_10_3" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF003.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

**EPC IN ACTION**

> The headline was, 'What is the hardest language to learn?' That was
> shared somewhere in Europe an hour ahead of us. ... I'd seen it \[at
> home on my smartphone\]. ... Before I'd got into the car to go to work
> I \[thought\], 'This is going to be a political hot potato. It's not
> learning, it's information ... it's not going to
> []{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_234 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 234"
> role="doc-pagebreak"}teach anybody anything. ... By the time I had got
> in, parked my car, had a chat, sat down, looked at it again -- so this
> was only in a window of two hours -- the comments were just
> everywhere. ... I suddenly thought: this is it; this is the cultural
> element that we were looking for. They all have something to say about
> which is the hardest to learn because everyone speaks a different
> language in this company. Let's celebrate that; that's amazing. I
> would have potentially taken that down as a piece of non-learning
> content ... \[but\] what that taught me was to let peers review. The
> bad stuff just falls away, no one comments on it. (Gifford, 2014a, p6)

This was me in 2014, interviewed by CIPD Senior Researcher, Jonny
Gifford, for the report *Putting Social Media to Work*. This report
offers insight into why culture is the pinnacle of the EPC framework.
The stories in the report from a variety of organisations don't talk of
platforms or learning as much as they talk of people and how they work
together. The fundamentals of good learning experiences need the
foundations to be right, and those foundations all point to culture.
Without understanding your culture, you cannot understand what learning
means.

At the time of the interview, I was a Global Head of Learning in a
corporate of 3,000 staff. We introduced an online learning platform to
support a global merger, to offer consistency to learning, and to move
away from only offering face-to-face options as there were too few L&D
staff to cope with the volume effectively. We had very clear reasons for
moving to digital.

At that time, I hadn't developed the EPC framework; however, it was
emerging in my thinking. This experience encouraged me to consider how
much these three arenas impact the success of learning solutions. We
faced the Environment, Permission and Culture questions before we
implemented the learning solution.

On Environment, we had desk-based staff and warehouse-based staff. The
learning platform created the perfect environment for office staff.
However, we had to address the issue of BYOD (bring your own device) for
our warehouse staff, as they didn't have company-provided tech. We
launched first to our desk-based people, to prove the concept, iron out
challenges, and gather data to support the business case for networking
the warehouse teams.

On Permission, I was very aware going into the project that there was
variable take up of face-to-face learning from different locations. I
held a stakeholder conversation with every country manager and ran
webinars demonstrating the system for them to see, feel, hear and ask
questions about the shift in paradigm from one learning offer to
another. It didn't always work, as the story I shared in [Chapter
3](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml) about the disengaged country MD demonstrated.
Without his permission, his team simply didn't
[]{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_235 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 235"
role="doc-pagebreak"}engage. There is no judgement from me in that --
everyone makes their own decision in business as they see fit, and he
had good reasons. However, in order to ensure success, addressing the
lack of engagement was a conversation I needed to have with him.
Permission starts with understanding people and their issues. It is
unfortunate that we still need to consider permission in work, rather
than assume autonomy, but I feel as a society we are at a transition
point in creating good working practices -- certainly something the CIPD
is pushing for (Willmott, 2019).

And finally, on Culture, this project crystallised for me the fact that
without addressing workplace culture, you simply cannot be confident of
success for a learning solution. The culture at my organisation
manifested in a very social bunch of people across the globe, who were
used to large global conferences regularly bringing them together. We
harnessed what they liked about those learning experiences and distilled
it into a digital platform for nearly everyone. We launched in two
phases, with warehouse staff to follow desk-based staff for the simple
reason of hardware access. We worked with the culture having identified
it, albeit not entirely before launch, as the quote above showed!

So much of what we did on the implementation of the new learning
platform was all about creating the right learning environment, ensuring
permissions were in place for learning, and adapting the culture of the
organisation to build one that enabled effective learning. When you read
through other stories in the CIPD report, it is clear their successes
also faced into these three areas. The social enterprise housing
service, Bromford, stands out in particular for the implementation of an
enterprise social network which entirely matched the culture of their
organisation. Helena Moore, Director of Communications and
Organisational Development, noted:

> We started to realise it was about empowering people to make
> decisions, to do the right things for customers, or do the right
> things in whatever role that they were doing, and that's what we
> started to emulate. ... It's seeing things holistically... Rather
> than, 'Don't, don't, don't,' it's more, 'Do, do, do,' you know. 'Do
> blog. Do have a voice. And just be mindful of these guidelines. Here's
> these guidelines made simple to help you.' Rather than 'Don't say
> that' and scaring people with a list of 'don'ts'. (Gifford, 2014b)

Learning does not happen in isolation. I am reminded of the African
proverb 'it takes a village to raise a child'; it takes an entire
company to engage in a true learning culture. Both of the quotes from
the CIPD report show learning and culture are intrinsically linked, and
the impact learning will have will, therefore, be more powerful if it
leans into a culture rather than fights against it. That said, if your
culture is not yet open to effective learning, the EPC framework offers
a lens to shift it by. Consider your []{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_236
.pagebreak aria-label="Page 236" role="doc-pagebreak"}environment and
why it is like it is. Consider your permissions and why they are like
they are. Gather your evidence to have fruitful conversations. As
described in the CIPD report, we ran a tiny trial on Salesforce Chatter
to monitor behaviours and purpose. The trial helped us to see the
environment, permission and culture situations we were dealing with, and
know what type of socialised learning platform we needed to look for to
suit us, and what it needed to offer to work. In 2014, there was only
one on the market, which was perfect for our needs. Now there are
several other players, which is always helpful for L&D professionals and
the organisations we work with. But the right one will become evident
when the research around these three critical areas -- Environment,
Permission and Culture -- is undertaken.

Doing EPC right

The EPC framework is a lens through which to consider building a
learning culture, by understanding the impact that environment and
permission have on your culture, and what impact that culture has on the
success of learning solutions. Draw on the following to apply the
framework to your setting:

1.  Consider the physical environment people learn in

2.  Consider the hardware and software people learn with

3.  Understand the concept of permission in your organisation

4.  Consider the unwritten rules and how they could affect a learning
    solution

5.  Dig deep to unearth your real company culture

6.  Consider your culture carefully and how it impacts on learning

7.  Move your learning offer at the pace your organisation needs you to

</aside>

<figure id="_13_CHAPTER_C10_UFigure_10_4" class="figure">
<p><span id="13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_237" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 237" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF004.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_13_CHAPTER_C10_UFigure_10_9" class="figure"
aria-describedby="_13_CHAPTER_C10_UFigure_10_9_details">
<p><img src="content/images/M13UF001.png"
alt="The figure shows 4 clusters of factors." /></p>
<details id="_13_CHAPTER_C10_UFigure_10_9_details">
<summary>
Figure details
</summary>
<p>The factors are as follows:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Mindset: empathy, macro thinking, non-assuming, holistic, clear
vision</p></li>
<li><p>Skillset: systems thinking, diplomacy, communication</p></li>
<li><p>Toolset: role modelling, language of your business, behavioral
psychology, power of colors, power of culture</p></li>
<li><p>Dataset: clarity of behavior context data, culture data, pulse
survey, employee engagement survey, best places to work data, industry
health check</p></li>
</ul>
</details>
</figure>

<aside aria-label="Tip (10.3)" class="tip" id="_13_CHAPTER_C10_sec_005" role="complementary">

<figure id="_13_CHAPTER_C10_UFigure_10_5" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF005.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_13_CHAPTER_C10_UTable_10_1" class="table">
<p><a href="#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml__13_CHAPTER_C10_sec_006">Skip
table</a></p>
<div class="table" role="table" tabindex="0">
<table class="left">
<thead>
<tr>
<th scope="col"><p>Tweet</p></th>
<th scope="col"><p>Tips checklist</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><p>09-Nov-15 For modern learning, environment, permission &amp;
culture need to be ripe for change. Start with an audit check
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Start with an EPC audit</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>16-Mar-15 Get the company’s most engaging presenter to share what
they do well in a presentation. Learn from each other
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Enable social learning</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>21-Jan-15 Go for a walk. Walking supports learning with exercise,
oxygen and a new viewpoint. Meets outdoors work too #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Consider physical environments</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><span id="13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_238" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 238" role="doc-pagebreak"></span>22-Jul-15 From initial
conversations &amp; interests, communities can spill. Capture them,
nurture them, learn from them #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Nurture learning communities</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>12-Nov-15 To ensure success, don’t underestimate need for
groundwork foundations in preparing org for modern learning
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>EPC are learning foundations</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>27-Jan-15 Bringing new ideas &amp; change to your business is
challenging. Stay happy &amp; healthy to help your quest be best
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Take care of you, this is tough work</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>17-Mar-15 Learning Space is important. Move away from sterile
workplaces. The creative learning space #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Create relevant learning space</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>28-Oct-15 Once people are onboard with mindset &amp; cultural
shift in learning meet needs with a breadth of interventions
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Build a learning mindset</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>14-Sep-15 Happy Places = ace space! Having desktop Happy Place
photo helps thinking, creating, sharing, learning, living
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Happy place = learning space</strong></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
</figure>

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (10.4)" class="box" id="_13_CHAPTER_C10_sec_006" role="complementary">

<figure id="_13_CHAPTER_C10_UFigure_10_6" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF006.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   What environmental conditions are you expecting your learners to
    learn in? Are they appropriate to successful learning?

-   What equipment are you providing your learners? Is it appropriate to
    successful learning?

-   Do learners have permission to learn?

-   Do learners make an excuse of environment, permission and culture to
    not learn? How can you encourage them?

-   Who can help you ease any blockers to learning?

-   Do you have a learning culture? How will you encourage one?

-   []{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_239 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 239"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}What is the biggest, most impactful change that
    needs to happen for learning in respect of environment, permission
    and culture?

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (10.5)" class="box" id="_13_CHAPTER_C10_sec_007" role="complementary">

<figure id="_13_CHAPTER_C10_UFigure_10_7" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF007.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Speak to learners as stakeholders. Find out what they need to learn
    well.

-   Build a business case to ensure appropriate learning environments.

-   Face into the honest conversations about permission to learn.

-   Use data and research to support the building of an effective
    learning culture.

-   Visit different locations to notice how environment makes an impact
    on learning.

-   Showcase learning successes to celebrate your learning culture.

</aside>

::: {#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml__13_CHAPTER_C10_sec_008 .section .references .bibliography aria-label="THE LIBRARY LIST (10.6)" role="doc-bibliography"}
<figure id="_13_CHAPTER_C10_UFigure_10_8" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF008.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Clark-Johnney, Z (2020) Restricted technology and budgets: no
    barrier to digital learning, *YouTube* \[online\]
    [[youtu.be/MTyqcV-ZKfs]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.youtu.be/MTyqcV-ZKfs)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/FZP8-26XW]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/FZP8-26XW))

-   Dyer, C (2018) *The Power of Company Culture*, Kogan Page, London

-   Gifford, J (2014a) Putting social media to work: lessons from
    employers -- Santa Fe Group, *CIPD* \[online\]
    [[www.cipd.co.uk/Images/putting-social-media-to-work_2014-santa-fe_tcm18-28440.pdf]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.cipd.co.uk/Images/putting-social-media-to-work_2014-santa-fe_tcm18-28440.pdf)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/3LAK-XP9M]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/3LAK-XP9M))

-   []{#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml_page_240 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 240"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}Gifford, J (2014b) Putting social media to
    work: Bomford, *CIPD* \[online\]
    [[www.cipd.co.uk/Images/putting-social-media-to-work_2014-bromford_tcm18-28436.pdf]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.cipd.co.uk/Images/putting-social-media-to-work_2014-bromford_tcm18-28436.pdf)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/4GSB-2SBQ]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/4GSB-2SBQ))

-   Humm, S (2015) Infographic: The creative learning space, *HR Review*
    \[online\]
    [[www.hrreview.co.uk/focus/hr-infographics/infographic-creative-learning-space/55808]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.hrreview.co.uk/focus/hr-infographics/infographic-creative-learning-space/55808)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/CK2M-XXGY]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/CK2M-XXGY))

-   Jacobs, A (2015) Our days are a kaleidoscope, *lostanddesperate.com*
    \[online\]
    [[www.lostanddesperate.com/2015/11/13/our-days-are-a-kaleidoscope/]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.lostanddesperate.com/2015/11/13/our-days-are-a-kaleidoscope/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/6K22-76MR]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/6K22-76MR))

-   Willmott, B (2019) CIPD Manifesto for Work 2020, *CIPD* \[online\]
    [[www.cipd.co.uk/Images/cipd-manifesto-for-work-2020_tcm18-68625.pdf]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.cipd.co.uk/Images/cipd-manifesto-for-work-2020_tcm18-68625.pdf)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/9D6C-GNEY]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/9D6C-GNEY))
:::

::: {#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml__13_CHAPTER_C10_sec_009 .section .endnotes aria-labelledby="_13_CHAPTER_C10_h1_009"}
# Notes {#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml__13_CHAPTER_C10_h1_009 .title}

[1](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml__13_CHAPTER_C10_Endnote_10_1_reference) You
can see images of the hotels here:
[[www.ibis.accor.com/discovering/ibis-styles-hotel/index.en.shtml]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.ibis.accor.com/discovering/ibis-styles-hotel/index.en.shtml)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/9DAK-3HC4]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/9DAK-3HC4))

[2](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml__13_CHAPTER_C10_Endnote_10_2_reference)
Outdoor education centre,
[[www.nellbank.com/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.nellbank.com/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/W5WS-TM9N]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/W5WS-TM9N))

[3](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml__13_CHAPTER_C10_Endnote_10_3_reference) For
those unable to get to London, you can see some of the exhibition via
this link:
[[www.designmuseum.org/exhibitions/designer-maker-user]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.designmuseum.org/exhibitions/designer-maker-user)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/6Z29-RV7W]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/6Z29-RV7W))
:::

[]{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

<div>

[]{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_241 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 241"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[[11]{.ordinal
.ordinal}](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_14_CHAPTER_C11_sec_001)

# [The 3Rs -- Required, Resourced, Referred](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_14_CHAPTER_C11_sec_001) {#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_h1_001 .title}

Kairos Modern Learning's framework to develop learning solutions

</div>

<figure id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_1" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M14NF001.png"
alt="The figure shows three concentric circles labeled required, resourced, and referred from inside to outside." /></p>
<figcaption><p><a
href="#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml#loi_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_1"><span
class="label">Figure</span> <span class="ordinal">11.1</span> 3Rs
Framework</a></p></figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_UFigure_11_1" class="figure">
<p><span id="14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_242" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 242" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF001.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

In my work as a learning consultant, I have used the 3Rs of required,
resourced and referred in a framework to help develop learning solutions
that position learning as a high-impact catalyst for success in my
clients' businesses. I should point out that this is not a learning
design model, nor am I, by trade, a learning designer or an
instructional designer. I develop learning offers to solve client
problems, which involves crafting some design, curating effective
learning pathways, and helping people to gain a thirst for learning and
sharing. It is, like my other frameworks, a way of thinking about and
approaching the development of learning.

In this context, we can define the components of the 3Rs framework as
follows:

-   Required -- what is the minimum a learner needs in order to solve
    their business problem, or to make people capably compliant, or to
    pass the qualification, or to answer whatever the driving need for
    learning is.

-   Resourced -- what additional assets or resources could be useful to
    the learner to aid their wider thinking and learning, especially
    whilst doing their work.

-   Referred -- what can the learner be encouraged to share back into
    their learning cohort community to help them stretch or challenge
    their thinking. Most importantly, how can this help to create a
    genuine learning culture.

The three elements work in harmony in a scaffolded learning way. Start
with the minimum of what it is they need to do their job, layer on more
learning materials to help learners expand their thinking, and then
encourage them to teach back into the community. The framework takes its
influences from a variety of learning models I have been introduced to
over the years, but it is a much less complex framing; more a guide to
thinking about learning solutions. It is a basic taxonomy, influenced by
a variety of sources: a view of Robert Gagne's instructional
steps[]{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Endnote_11_1_reference
.anchor}^[1](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Endnote_11_1)^, plus
motivational theories such as Dan Pink's *Drive* (Pink, 2009), with a
sprinkling of neuroscience, such as David Rock's AGES (Davachi *et al*,
2010) and Stella Collins' brain friendly learning (Collins, 2016). As I
say, not a model, more of a mindset approach.

[]{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_243 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 243"
role="doc-pagebreak"}These influences have all played a part in
improving my practice. I don't subscribe to one methodology. Like the
bumblebees at an Unconference (discussed in [Chapter
8](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml)), I flit around lots of ideas in L&D to
cross-pollinate them, with the aim of ensuring the solutions I offer my
clients are the right solutions for the problems we are solving
together. I encourage you to follow a similar principle with all the
frameworks and ideas I am sharing in this book. There is never only one
answer for everyone and every situation.

This framework has developed because I keep coming back to these ideas
when looking at learning solutions. People are busy, and while they may
not always care for L&D, they do want answers to help them do their jobs
well. When designing learning solutions, give people what they want and
need -- what is the bare minimum required to get them up to speed? This
is not as counterintuitive as it first appears. We are not talking deep
levels of competency here, just what they need to get through the day.
Then build over time.

By making learning easy and quick, people will likely use your bite-size
offer more often. You have whetted their appetite and increasingly they
hunger for more, hence the resourced learning pathway. The resources are
carefully curated, rather than presented in one block, so it continues
to be easy for people to engage with learning in an ongoing fashion.

Once the learner has the bug for learning, encouraging them and giving
them space to bring in their own learning experiences to share with
their colleagues is proof a learning culture is establishing itself in
your organisation. The referrals could be as simple as sharing a book
recommendation on your company intranet, or holding a lunch and learn to
share their learning and knowledge. The level of sophistication of their
sharing doesn't really matter. What matters is that people feel the
environment is right for them to show their learning openly. It also
means they have the right hardware and software to enable them to do
that. They feel confident, able and allowed to share their
vulnerabilities whilst on a learning journey. What matters most of all
is that the learning culture has got to such a stage that sharing is
welcomed, even encouraged, and maybe expected.

This framework plays directly into the heart of building a learning
culture. Because we have really done our homework and know our strategy,
our stakeholders and our consultative data stories, and we have examined
our organisation in depth through the ICE and EPC lenses, we are
confidently able to offer what our learners need in a way that suits
them to receive it. The 3Rs framework is one way of bringing everything
we have been building up throughout this book together and using it to
build the most effective learning solutions for our people.

[]{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_244 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 244"
role="doc-pagebreak"}

Once I have done all my homework, by following the 3Rs approach I can
identify exactly what is needed for my clients' L&D proposals to be
successful. The framework is the culmination of a consultative,
evidence-informed process which enables a simple, clear offer to an
organisation. The 3Rs framework respects learners' time, availability,
and necessity to learn. It also encourages thinking and building upon
what they are learning. Plus it welcomes what they know already and are
learning to be shared, explored safely, and without judgement.

This framework is a way of thinking that I have developed, trialled and
utilised over a number of years of working with clients. It reminds us
L&Ders to always keep our learners at the heart of our work. It gets us
thinking about the right methods and inputs at the right time, starting
at the very important development and design stage of learning
solutions.

<figure id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_UFigure_11_2" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF002.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

[Purposeful learning
solutions](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_14_CHAPTER_C11_h3_001)

I believe all learning has to be purposeful. We must respect that in the
world outside of the L&D department, learning is not a top priority for
our colleagues. It is not front of mind, as it is for us. When people
don't know something, they just want to get the information and move on
with their day. Occasionally, some engage more readily in learning,
looking forward to a day out of the office to learn something new or
reflect on a great project. Whether they are thinking about the
learning, or simply enjoying the biscuits, is anyone's guess, but we
have to respect where our learners are coming from. What do they really
want? I will bet nobody ever said 'Yay, two hours of e-learning to do
today', at least, not without a sarcastic tone in their voice. Without
learners having a purpose, what's the point? That may sound blindingly
obvious -- and it is -- but you may be surprised by how much learning
I've been asked to support without it being purposeful. I soon changed
that!

Traditional L&D starts with a training needs analysis. As you've no
doubt already gathered from previous chapters (if you've read them, that
is, as you may be taking the dipping in and out approach), I prefer
business []{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_245 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 245" role="doc-pagebreak"}strategy and business needs
analysis, layered with individual needs. The problem with training or
learning needs analysis is that individuals often don't know what they
need with regards to learning. It's our job, as L&D professionals, to
help individuals and organisations find out what their actual learning
needs are. But starting by asking people what learning they need is
never fruitful in my experience, as people cannot articulate it clearly
in the same way they can articulate what gets in the way of their work,
or what would make their work better. In [Chapters
2](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml) to [5](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml), we saw how
consultative L&D and evidence-based practice surfaces real learning
needs. This chapter concentrates on what happens beyond the
identification of needs, in particular, how we go about developing a
learning solution. Our L&D role is to provide something that gets
straight into supporting those needs.

[Start with the end in mind,
again](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_14_CHAPTER_C11_h3_002)

As L&D professionals, we bring everything we have to our learning
solutions; it is our core work, our beating heart. We can be, then,
tempted to throw everything at it. The 3Rs framework stops that from
happening, because it reminds us that learning is not about us, it is
about our learners. We address their learning needs in a three-layered
approach through this framework, which keeps the focus always on them
and the problem we are trying to solve for them. As noted in Chapter 5,
we must remember Covey's advice and start with the end in mind (Covey,
2020). We must focus on the desired outcomes from learning to give
clarity to what needs to happen for a learner to reach those outcomes.

[R1 --
Required](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_14_CHAPTER_C11_h3_003)

This element of the 3Rs framework considers the minimum a learner needs
in order to solve their business problem, or to make people capably
compliant, or to pass the qualification, or to answer whatever the
driving need for learning is.

When you're learning for a qualification or for a specific business
purpose, there will be a minimum requirement to pass a test, to show
competency, or to get a job done. This is what the first part,
'required', focuses on. You put together learning interventions for your
learners, which covers the bare minimum required in order for them to be
successful. The bare minimum has some negative connotations of not being
good enough. That is absolutely not what we are talking about here.
Think of the bare minimum more as the essence of what is needed for
success. The bare minimum []{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_246 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 246" role="doc-pagebreak"}required could be a six-month
complex blended learning programme. With 'required', we are focusing on
stripping learning back to only providing what is necessary to solve the
business problem that generated the need for learning in the first
place.

It may be hard for some L&Ders to do this. We have a tendency towards
the verbose, so brevity is a skill to hone. Whilst we may think
everything is important to include, perhaps because we have always done
it that way, we need to strip it down. It's such good practice to distil
something down to the essence. That's how you really get to the heart of
a problem and its required solutions.

[Strip back to the
minimum](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_14_CHAPTER_C11_h4_001)

Learning to strip back content can be tough. You have to be
self-disciplined and methodical. However, doing this respects people's
ability to learn in the flow of work. It also respects people's ability
to offer their time to learning in the knowledge that the majority of
time spent at work is doing the work. It respects getting to the heart
of the issue that is preventing the work taking place. It is never
learning for the sake of it. There are a few ways to offer only what is
required.

You could start with everything you would normally think should be
included in a learning offer across all the formats and modes of
delivery. Then ask tough questions of yourself and cut back. Taking
influence from Marie Kondo of house tidying fame, we need to keep only
what is really required. As Marie suggests to those who live in
cluttered homes, hold the item and consider: does it spark joy? (Kondo,
2011, p47). Take a look at the learning you want to include and
metaphorically hold it. Consider whether it sparks the answer to the
business problem. Or do you just like that activity because it is fun?
Be honest with yourselves. Be brutal. Consider it always from your
learner's perspective. Being brutally honest, I really don't like
irrelevant ice breakers that are not connected to the learning. They
patronise adults. We should just get on with the learning.

In contrast to starting large and going small, you could start small.
You could test and learn. Put your learning plan together then take it
to a small sample group of learners to review and build together. You
could even run a trial with them. Ask them to note when they drifted
away, or felt bored, or noticed when they stopped engaging. Checking in
with your audience is a perfect way to ensure they are getting exactly
what they need. To do this, you may need to be brave and thick-skinned.
Remember, it is about the learning and not you.

[]{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_247 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 247"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Another way to strip back to the minimum is ask
'why?' a lot. You could try the Toyota 5
Whys[]{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Endnote_11_2_reference
.anchor}^[2](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Endnote_11_2)^
technique to scrutinise different elements of your proposed learning
solution. A willing, open and creative mind can strip back learning to
its core without any loss of impact. It is easier to do this if you
really examine why your learners need learning in the first place and if
what you are offering them has been 'why?' tested.

Consider your modes of delivery too. If you usually run one-day learning
sessions, question how that time is filled. In a face-to-face setting,
there is usually some 'waste' in terms of lost learning time, due to
networking, lunch and tea breaks. These are all very valuable as part of
the overall learning experience. However, they are not 'required' to
reach learning outcomes (unless the outcome is, of course, to build
better networked relationships, in which case, they are the learning!).
They could take place separately if they offer a value of their own
(which they most certainly can do). A 9-5 face-to-face day could have as
little as 60 per cent teaching/facilitating time, and even less when
accounting for people being late, taking more breaks, etc., as shown
below.

<figure id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_UTable_11_1" class="table">
<p><a href="#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_UTable_11_1-skip">Skip
table</a></p>
<div class="table" role="table" tabindex="0">
<table class="left">
<thead>
<tr>
<th scope="col"><p>Time</p></th>
<th scope="col"><p>Activity</p></th>
<th scope="col"><p>Minutes</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><p>09:00-09:30</p></td>
<td><p>Arrivals</p></td>
<td><p>0</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>09:30-10:45</p></td>
<td><p>Session 1</p></td>
<td><p>75</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>10:45-11:15</p></td>
<td><p>Tea Break</p></td>
<td><p>0</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>11:15-12:30</p></td>
<td><p>Session 2</p></td>
<td><p>75</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>12:30-13:30</p></td>
<td><p>Lunch</p></td>
<td><p>0</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>13:30-14:45</p></td>
<td><p>Session 3</p></td>
<td><p>75</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>14:45-15:15</p></td>
<td><p>Tea Break</p></td>
<td><p>0</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>15:15-16:30</p></td>
<td><p>Session 4</p></td>
<td><p>75</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>16:30-17:00</p></td>
<td><p>Leaving</p></td>
<td><p>0</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>480 minutes</p></td>
<td><p>Total</p></td>
<td><p>300</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
</figure>

If a few hours covers the essence of the learning required, it is a
better use of everyone's time to plan for half a day. Or consider how a
few webinars could really get to the heart of the learning without any
real loss of integrity, and the advantage of reflection time. Or how a
blend of a half-day session then a digital element could support the
valuable networking, making learning online afterwards more impactful,
particularly given the benefits of spacing learning out.

[]{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_248 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 248"
role="doc-pagebreak"}And when you are asking about the learning, don't
forget to strip that to the minimum too. You have an evaluation survey
of 20 questions which includes the booking process, the venue, the
trainer, the learning. Cut it down. What do you really need to know from
that survey? What are your three killer questions? Try Driscoll's 'what,
so what, now
what?'[]{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Endnote_11_3_reference
.anchor}^[3](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Endnote_11_3)^ Or I
prefer two questions I borrowed from my husband's field of education:
'What went well? Even better if...?' I have added 'What is next?' to
offer an onward, future intent. Together they are WWW, EBI and WIN; my
favourite three acronyms.

These are a few ideas to cull your learning offer to the bare minimum in
order to help learning happen and work continue. Take the fat out and
you will find people feast more regularly.

[R2 --
Resourced](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_14_CHAPTER_C11_h3_005)

This element of the 3Rs framework considers what additional assets or
resources could be useful to the learner to aid their wider thinking and
learning. It is the recommendation element, 'if you liked that, you
could find this useful'.

The resourced element reminds us to always offer supplementary
materials. They could be simply recaps of what was in the required
learning, or they could be extension tasks or further reading/watching.
They are the extras on top of the minimum to enhance that initial
experience. The opportunities for resources are endless: industry
magazine articles, blogs, podcasts, videos, research papers, books,
newspapers, tickets to a conference, reflective questions, and so on.
You are limited only by your imagination. A useful tip for sharing
resources people actually want is to get your cohort to write down all
the ways they learn anything in their lives. This list is your toolbox
for curating your resources. Try to make sure there is something in your
solution for everyone.

The resources are supplementary to the bare minimum requirement. Whilst
the bare minimum is an acceptable level of learning to solve a problem
and get the job done, it stands to reason that further thinking and
learning will enhance performance and engagement. It is important, then,
that any resources provided are an integral part of the learning and are
not just seen as a 'nice to have' add-on. It is particularly important
that line managers recognise the 3Rs framework's whole approach, not
just the required learning, or else they may not encourage or give time
for learners to engage with additional resources.

[]{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_249 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 249"
role="doc-pagebreak"}In building a learning culture, the resourced
element of this framework is crucial. The resourced element supports a
heutagogical
approach[]{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Endnote_11_4_reference
.anchor}^[4](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Endnote_11_4)^, as
discussed in [Chapter 9](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml) -- adults need to be
free to learn, share, and grow as they need. Any doubting middle
managers need to understand that self-directed learners are better
employees. Blaschke quotes Hase & Kenyon in her paper on 'Heutagogy and
Lifelong Learning':

> Capable people exhibit the following traits:
>
> -   self-efficacy, in knowing how to learn and continuously reflect on
>     the learning process
>
> -   communication and teamwork skills, working well with others and
>     being openly communicative
>
> -   creativity, particularly in applying competencies to new and
>     unfamiliar situations and by being adaptable and flexible in
>     approach
>
> -   positive values (Blaschke, 2012)

These are solid benefits in any workplace, and, in an ideal world, the
gold standard. It is our role in L&D to ensure all stakeholders
understand and support this. We must not only offer the required element
of the 3Rs framework, we absolutely need to also offer the resourced
element to ensure the learning environment, permission and culture are
right for self-directed adult learners.

[Ensuring good
resources](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_14_CHAPTER_C11_h4_002)

For those learners who are interested and want to learn more, it is
important we offer them quality resources. As an L&Der, this is about
you curating good materials and pointing learners towards them. The
resources can't be any old thing that you find. They have to be relevant
and useful. The additional content should be respectful to the desired
outcomes of learning, plus can cast the net a little wider to stretch
and push a learning culture. Think Amazon or Netflix recommendations: if
you like them, then you'll like this. You may have an automated
recommendations engine to help you with this, such as Filtered or Anders
Pink. Or you have a manual recommendations option via Twitter lists or
your LinkedIn feed. Alternatively, you could lean on your subject matter
experts to make suggestions for additional resources. [Chapters
6](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml) and [9](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml) give more
advice on effective curation; all that is left to be said here is to
ensure any curation is relevant to the learning topic. It is better for
the learner to have a few relevant resources than a shelf full of
unrelated paraphernalia. Also, set a calendar reminder to regularly
[]{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_250 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 250"
role="doc-pagebreak"}review the shared resources, to ensure they are
always up-to-date. The skill of good curation is not to put everything
on display at the same time. It's much better to tell a story succinctly
with a few selected and relevant artefacts -- just like at a great
gallery or museum.

In the 3Rs framework, resources must add value. However, the learning
intervention needs to still be fruitful without them. This is important,
as the reality is that some people will not engage with anything other
than the required learning. They still need to be able to do their jobs
with only the required learning. Without the resources, the learning
could potentially be a bit brief or dry, but it shouldn't be. No learner
should be penalised for doing only the required learning. The resourced
part of the 3Rs framework offers the ability to build and support a
wider learning culture by encouraging self-directed learning, whilst
acknowledging some people never fully engage in learning, hence the
required element. We give them what they need and we build on that with
those that want to.

Cake theory (see [Chapter 3](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml)) comes into play
here. If you build relevant, interesting, useful learning pathways or
resource libraries, and you demonstrate their value, especially with the
advocacy of learners, people will want a piece of them. The Good
Practice report *Google It!: The secret online lives of UK managers*
(Ferguson and Scott, 2016, p7) clearly indicates the top three options
when faced with a workplace challenge are:

1.  Relying on personal experience

2.  Seeking the advice of colleagues or your manager

3.  Using an internet search engine like Google or Bing to search for
    content relevant to your challenge

The risks to using these three are they are haphazard, they can be slow,
and they can lack relevance. If you have an internal resource library
accessed easily, perhaps via your intranet, where the answers to the
'how to' questions can easily be found, you will find people use your
resources. The Good Practice report continues; 'Around a quarter (27%)
say they prefer to visit websites they know and trust to help overcome
workplace management challenges.' (p11)

So, you are not starting from zero when introducing resources where the
behaviour to seek resource exists already. We just need to be one of the
'know and trust' resource banks which 'help overcome workplace
management challenges'. In addition, we are talking about resources
related to specific learning for a specific cohort which deepen their
experience, []{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_251 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 251" role="doc-pagebreak"}challenge their thinking and
change their behaviours. The idea is they come to the L&D resources as a
first port of call.

[Sharing
resources](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_14_CHAPTER_C11_h4_003)

Practically speaking, you will need to consider the way in which you
share your resources, particularly if you don't have an online learning
system, an enterprise social network or accessible intranet. It is
unlikely, in the light of the afore-mentioned report, that a paper-based
resource bank will win over the Googling UK managers who will rely on
their search engine habit.

Girlguiding had this particular problem following a national conference
for trainers. The conference was attended by around half the trainers,
and the Volunteer L&D Team were conscious of not excluding the resources
from those that couldn't attend, plus also having a library of resources
as aide memoire for those that did attend. Without a digital learning
platform, and only a public facing internet, the team had to consider
how to share the resources. The collaboration software Padlet was used
as it was a cost effective solution which provided the conference team
and trainers a secure place to share resources, with the added advantage
of commenting on them. Other free or cheap options to use if you need to
share resources could be social channels such as Twitter or closed
Facebook pages, communication channels such as WhatsApp, MS Teams or
even emails. You could also consider project software such as Trello, MS
Planner or Miro. Don't be put off by a technology option because it was
not designed for the express purpose you want to use it for. Creative
work arounds are an excellent way of solving a practical problem.

The resources elements of the 3Rs framework is crucial for avoiding
'injection education' solutions by encouraging the opportunity for
ongoing learning back at learners' desks. Learning is never a one-off
injection of education.

[R3 --
Referred](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_14_CHAPTER_C11_h3_006)

This element of the 3Rs framework considers what can a learner be
encouraged to share back into their learning cohort community to help
them stretch or challenge their thinking, whilst adding value to
colleagues. Most importantly, this element considers how this can help
to create a genuine learning culture. Such referred learning is often
user generated content, or user recommended content. In my experience,
such content gets good traction because it has immense relevance to its
audience.

[]{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_252 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 252"
role="doc-pagebreak"}In this context, after a learning intervention, our
L&D role shifts from learning facilitator and resource provider to
community manager. This third element is all about fostering an active
community where learners can gain support, share their questions and
their vulnerabilities in understanding their learning, and they can
refer shared assets back into their peer network. Peer-to-peer learning
is so important in an organisation and anything you can do that
facilitates and encourages it is good for your learners. When people
share their information and their learning with others it makes
connections from the learning experience to the context of the
organisation. That helps people to also make connections with each
other, and you spiral upwards with communications, learning and sharing.

You may wish to set up an online space for the peer learning community
using one of the many community online options, such as an enterprise
social network, your intranet, or the social elements and forums of your
LMS. Community management of the referral space will need to be factored
into your learning delivery plans. Learn, for example, from the best
MOOC (Massive Open Online Course) providers, as they will tell you how
hard they work to ensure a productive sharing space online. They have a
team of educators and facilitators who go into the online shared
learning spaces in order to encourage, praise, question, and gently
challenge the participants to keep the conversations going. There is
nothing worse than tumbleweed rolling by in your shared online space --
don't let it happen. You will need to manage activity, at least at
first, so plan for positive, purposeful and productive interactions by
modelling great behaviour.

There are many ways in which you can encourage and facilitate learning
to keep taking place. Drip feeding and encouraging sharing might be hard
work at first, but a community soon gets into a rhythm and stride if you
keep at it and it is relevant. You may wish to set up a mentoring scheme
to enable ongoing community learning. Or you could facilitate more
formal communities of practice. Perhaps organised alumni groups for
cohort conversations could encourage learners themselves to find a space
or way they prefer to connect, reflect, refer, and share. Once the
formal spaces get going, do continue to check in and prod them, nicely.

You may rather have something much less formal, perhaps just using
communication rather than learning tools that keep people connected and
help them arrange to meet others. We should remember that many great
organisations started as socialised communities meeting in coffee houses
(see [Chapter 6](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml)). There are good precedents for
setting up coffee chats or []{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_253 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 253" role="doc-pagebreak"}lunch and learns -- although
I always caveat this with a reminder that people need a break from work,
so learning in break time needs to be in addition to an actual break.

I am lucky enough to be invited to judge industry awards, and those that
win social and collaborative awards have purposeful and regular
community engagement. They borrow a lot from marketing and social media,
including their measurements, such as page impressions, reach and active
engagement. They don't just measure likes and shares. They investigate
behaviour shifts, employee engagement survey data and net promoter
scores, as they are clear that peer-to-peer referred content, discussion
and support is successful in workplace learning.

Some of the keys to success in the third element of the 3Rs framework
are the rhythm and regularity. As an example, at CIPD Learning we have a
daily learning get-together. It started out each afternoon as Tea at
Three, a half hour social support time early on during the 2020
lockdown, with quizzes and fun as a way to connect and escape the
loneliness of working at home. It later morphed into Team at Three, a
learning community where we focus on Learn, Link, Look and Laugh. We
learn from each about what we are working on, what we have learnt more
formally, or any other learning we wish to share. We link our work to
cross-departmental work, or link to research or reports we have come
across. We look at books or articles or at whatever the team want to
share. And importantly, we have a laugh, reinvigorating the essence of
our lockdown Tea at Three. The importance of team connection in the
third of the 3Rs elements is hugely important. People learn best when
they are relaxed and connected.

[The 3Rs framework in
pictures](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_14_CHAPTER_C11_h3_007)

<figure id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_2" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M14NF002.png"
alt="The figure shows an arrow pointing from a person to 3 boxes labeled formal learning offer." /></p>
<figcaption><p><a
href="#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml#loi_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_2"><span
class="label">Figure</span> <span class="ordinal">11.2</span> Three
boxes</a></p></figcaption>
</figure>

The image shown in [Figure
11.2](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_2) is typical of a
formal learning offer. In those boxes, there could be three one-day
programmes, or pre-work, two days of learning and homework, or three
self-directed e-learning packages. It doesn't really matter what's in
the box, as this is just representative of a typical formal structure,
which is linear.

<figure id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_3" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M14NF003.png"
alt="The figure shows a person and three boxes." /></p>
<details id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_3-details">
<summary>
Figure 11.3 details
</summary>
<p>Arrows point from the person to each of the three boxes in sequence
and labeled formal learning offer. There are icons above and below the
boxes indicating speech, documents, books, microphones, and jobs.</p>
</details>
<figcaption><p><span id="14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_254"
class="pagebreak" aria-label="Page 254" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><a
href="#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml#loi_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_3"><span
class="label">Figure</span> <span class="ordinal">11.3</span> Three
boxes plus assets</a></p></figcaption>
</figure>

The reality of learning is that it is not linear and boxed in. [Figure
11.3](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_3) represents that
fact that learning happens all the time, and from a huge variety of
sources, often even serendipitously. People have conversations, are
influenced by their peers, books, podcasts, the news. Plus people seek
learning from search engines and their colleagues when they are stuck at
work. The reality is, people are not waiting for L&D's formal boxed
learning, they are learning all the time.

<figure id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_4" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M14NF004.png"
alt="The figure shows a person and three boxes." /></p>
<details id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_4-details">
<summary>
Figure 11.4 details
</summary>
<p>Arrows point from the person to each of the three boxes in sequence
and labeled formal learning offer. There are icons above and below the
boxes indicating speech, documents, books, microphones, and jobs. A
pathway is drawn from the person through the boxes and up and down
through the icons.</p>
</details>
<figcaption><p><a
href="#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml#loi_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_4"><span
class="label">Figure</span> <span class="ordinal">11.4</span> Three
boxes plus assets plus journey</a></p></figcaption>
</figure>

Whilst the learning journey we may think we are sending people on is
linear and orderly, as [Figure
11.4](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_4) shows, it is,
in fact, messy, unique, personal, and not just formal.

<figure id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_5" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M14NF005.png"
alt="The figure shows a person and three boxes." /></p>
<details id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_5-details">
<summary>
Figure 11.5 details
</summary>
<p>Arrows point from the person to each of the three boxes in sequence
and labeled formal learning offer. There are icons above and below the
boxes indicating speech, documents, books, microphones, and jobs. A
pathway is drawn from the person through the boxes and up and down
through the icons. The entire structure is encircled and labeled
Community.</p>
</details>
<figcaption><p><a
href="#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml#loi_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_5"><span
class="label">Figure</span> <span class="ordinal">11.5</span> Three
boxes plus assets plus journey plus community</a></p></figcaption>
</figure>

The 3Rs framework accepts these factors and plays into this reality. The
boxes become the required learning, the stuff people really need to
know. The assets around that are carefully curated and offered to save
the learner []{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_255 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 255" role="doc-pagebreak"}from the happenchance
serendipity of coming across something useful. The mix of formal and
informal learning, as represented in [Figure
11.5](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_5), offers help to
make learning a normalised, everyday activity -- still messy and
ongoing, but with less random resources. Moreover, by wrapping the
learners in a safe, welcoming and supportive community, then encouraging
learners to share their reflections, ask their questions, answer each
others' questions, and curate their own resources too, L&D is creating a
learning culture which replicates typical learning behaviours with
referred content.

As you can see from the illustrations in [Figures
11.2](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_2) to
[11.5](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_5), the 3Rs way
of thinking about learning helps us to focus on what is important. You
can dial up the differing elements of the framework depending on the
topic, audience experience, existing knowledge, access to technology,
learner curiosity, and so on. Some programmes will have a longer
required element -- please don't think I believe there should only ever
be three boxes, they are only indicative. Some learning will have a
lighter touch on the required element and be stronger on resources for
learners to pull on at their point of []{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_256
.pagebreak aria-label="Page 256"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[]{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_257 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 257" role="doc-pagebreak"}need. This element can be
continuously drip-fed over a long time, which keeps learners engaged and
coming back for more. And for me, the pinnacle of success of this
framework is when those resources are wholly supplied by the learner
communities themselves in self-organised learning cohorts.

The process is not formulaic in any way other than considering what the
business problem we are trying to solve is; hence, what is the minimum
learning needed in each 'box', what additional resources do we need to
offer and how will we encourage community referrals? The 3Rs framework
is a rule of thumb, not a design model. It takes a flexible approach,
which responds to the ever-changing needs and content materials
available for us to share with our learners. Understanding what you need
to dial up or dial down to fit your context is part of the approach.

[Other design
models](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_14_CHAPTER_C11_h3_008)

The L&D world does not need another learning design methodology, so
let's be clear, the 3Rs framework is simply a way to look at developing
learning solutions. It is high level and over-arching. The 3Rs framework
does not have enough detailed steps to build learning design around. It
is the step before the details kick in. In my work, it helps me to
continue my thinking from the ICE framework through the EPC framework to
ensure I have all the elements I need in place before I get into a
detailed design model. This top-level framework speaks to what is
required, the resources I can provide, and how I'll manage a community
in referring content to each other, and that is as detailed as it gets.
However, as you read this chapter, it probably will be, as Robert Gagne
suggests, 'stimulating prior
learning'.[]{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Endnote_11_5_reference
.anchor}^[5](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Endnote_11_5)^ This
means it is natural for you to read this framework and apply it to what
you know already. I caution you not to compare apples and pears. For
example, Robert Gagne's 9 Events is a popular instructional design
methodology. I like this model, although it may be considered quite
dated now. It offers steps to follow in learning design through a
detailed process:

1.  Gain attention

2.  Inform of objectives

3.  Recall prior learning

4.  Present the content

5.  Provide learner guidance

6.  Elicit performance

7.  []{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_258 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 258"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}Provide feedback

8.  Assess performance

9.  Enhance retention and transfer to reality

[The move to digital with the
3Rs](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_14_CHAPTER_C11_h3_009)

The 3Rs framework is particularly useful when moving face-to-face
learning to digital learning. At the very least, it's a great way to
refresh the learning you provide, getting rid of any dead wood. Getting
something down to the bare minimum of what is required through the lens
of a changing format enables you to look at something from all angles to
make better decisions. Then look at the next two Rs: what additional
resources can be provided and what falls into the referred category;
what are the things that people discuss and talk about face-to-face
which need a digital community to continue and enhance those
conversations and interactions? These are not the usual starting places
when we are following an instructional design plan. They tend to leap
directly to the learning itself, whereas I prefer to start with the
people, especially the learners.

Here's an example:

<aside aria-label="EXAMPLE (11.1)" class="example" epub:type="practice" id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_sec_002" role="complementary">

EXAMPLE

With some client engagements, the 3Rs framework is all I have needed to
help people think differently. I had a small face-to-face training sales
client who was losing sales as they couldn't offer enough reach. They
were a small team and they offered terrific sales training around
confidence. They believed breaking into the digital learning world was a
way forward to help them grow their business to more than the working
days they could offer, and it would allow them to have a holiday! A
highly successful business, my client wanted to be sure digital was for
them as they were a small company and this was a huge investment for
them. They needed to know there would be a good return as they didn't
have the funds to get their solution wrong. Initially, they spoke to a
few e-learning providers to help them. These providers used some of the
more traditional design methodologies models, in particular ADDIE
(Analysis, Design, Development, Implementation, and Evaluation). Even
though they were successful providers, they couldn't think outside of
their e-learning niche. They didn't know how best to approach a digital
learning offer which might not have been 'click next' e-learning. It was
too early in the process to []{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_259 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 259" role="doc-pagebreak"}be considering learning
design models. They weren't even sure of what digital learning strategy
they were considering. At this stage, I was brought in.

Using the 3Rs framework, we discussed the very essence of what my client
wanted digital learning to do for their business. We looked at different
digital options available to them and considered what their customers
would want. They shared feedback from face-to-face programmes which
described wanting my client available all the time so they could build
confidence just before a pitch. My client perceived longer e-learning
courses were losing popularity in our always-on world, so e-learning was
not the answer for them. They had a feeling they wanted to move to
short, video-based online learning assets, as they were too small to
scale, thus video would enable them to be available all the time to
their clients.

We explored the minimum amount of video they would need to effectively
teach their sales principles, and what more they could offer as
upselling resources. Their video learning was available all the time to
their customers on a subscription. For those who wanted more, the videos
could be blended into longer face-to-face programmes as appropriate.
They could flip their classroom offer to make it a space for ensuring
understanding, for practising, to offer coaching, or for any other
flexible learning. As they were no longer in the training room all day,
they had much more flexibility to scale their business. They could offer
more personalised resources, such as one-on-one sales coaching or
feedback on customer practice videos. These types of customer
interactions were of higher value and, as such, improved their business
model, as they were not giving all their time to classroom-based
activities. They also encouraged sales trainees to video themselves to
share with their community for peer review and for review by them. By
thinking about what was required, resourced and referred, my client
totally flipped their classroom-only offer on its head. They even get to
have a holiday or two now!

</aside>

Good instructional designers help the move to digital suit the audience.
In this case, we can see ADDIE simply doesn't address things in the
right order. Evaluation must not happen only at the end. We need to
evaluate at the end of a project -- all projects are cyclical and
evaluating what has gone before helps inform subsequent development. But
if you can use evaluation to inform design from the offset, that's got
to be a much better approach, hasn't it? When you evaluate at the
beginning as well as at the end, that's when you get much more targeted
design and much better results. My client went to digital learning
providers who followed models that evaluated at the end of
[]{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_260 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 260"
role="doc-pagebreak"}their cycle, and thus they got stuck in a rut of
creating what they always had created, that is, long-form, click-next
e-learning. This simply wasn't the answer for them. The e-learning
providers were asking the wrong questions.

Whilst the 3Rs framework is not a learning design framework, it is
higher-level thinking framework that helps me to work with my clients to
draw up solutions that are respectful to their unique circumstances
because it helps us talk about what is important.

[The fourth R --
Reflection?](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_14_CHAPTER_C11_h3_010)

<figure id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_6" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M14NF006.png"
alt="The figure shows four concentric circles labeled required, resourced, referred, and reflection from inside to outside." /></p>
<figcaption><p><a
href="#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml#loi_14_CHAPTER_C11_Figure_11_6"><span
class="label">Figure</span> <span class="ordinal">11.6</span> 3Rs
Framework with added Reflection</a></p></figcaption>
</figure>

As I genuinely encourage any learning solution to start with the end in
mind, it could be appropriate to add a fourth R -- Reflection -- to this
framework. The reason reflection is not a fourth R is because it needs
to be built into []{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_261 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 261" role="doc-pagebreak"}every other stage of the 3Rs
framework, so it actually wraps around each. Without reflecting, you
risk missing opportunities to improve. I will discuss reflection in more
detail in [Chapter 13](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml) -- it gets a whole chapter
because I see it as critical to successful L&D.

In considering reflection in the context of the 3Rs framework, however,
I encourage L&Ders to both personally reflect during the process of
developing the learning, and to encourage our learners to reflect too,
as part of their learning process. Consider how you can build in
reflective practice. It may need to be taught as a skill to empower your
learners and help them consider what they are learning, how it applies
to their jobs, what behaviours need shifting and how that feels for
them, plus helping them to notice what more they need to discover.
People have to be able to reflect both individually and, ideally, also
collectively, where possible, as a learning community. Community offers
sense checks for people who share their thinking, as well as
constructive challenges from their peers, which they can reflect on.

[The whole framework working
together](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_14_CHAPTER_C11_h3_013)

In conclusion, all three elements of the 3Rs framework (Required,
Resourced and Referred) need to be available to learners, alongside
regular reflective practice, in order to establish a well-rounded view
of the topic or skills to be learnt. You could offer just one R in your
learning solution, say, Required, but if you ensure access to all three,
then the results are so much greater. The learning will be richer. Deep
learning is not just about passing the test, and whilst the 3Rs
framework acknowledges that, for some, that is all they will engage in,
the framework is pushing us towards community-based, holistic, whole
framework learning.

As noted earlier, sometimes people struggle with establishing the first
R, the Required, paring down what's needed to the essence. I find it
really helps people if you remind them that we actually do this a lot,
every day, without thinking about it. Consider social media,
particularly where less is always more; Twitter supports only 280
characters in a Tweet, for example. Now that's a bare minimum for you.
Or one striking image on Instagram; the same bare minimum again. Or a
blog posted on LinkedIn, which is by its very definition a short form
piece of writing. All these brevity skills that we already have and use
every day can be applied to L&D.

<aside aria-label="Case-Study (11.2)" class="case-study" epub:type="case-study" id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_sec_003" role="complementary">

<figure id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_UFigure_11_3" class="figure">
<p><span id="14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_262" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 262" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF003.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

**3RS IN ACTION**

Consultative conversations with a call centre identified problems with
the organisation's onboarding process. Too much information given at
once was overwhelming for new hires. There had been an increase in
customer complaints, particularly skewed towards recently hired staff,
prompting a call for better learning. Taking staff off the phones is a
costly business and something not done lightly. Consultations with
experienced call handlers, investigations into the complaints, and a
review of the business processes all helped us to get to the root cause
of the problem and understand what was required: new staff needed more
practice before being faced with the public. Using the 3Rs framework to
consider learning solutions both supported learners and limited the
costs.

The required learning activities needed to include several practice
sessions, simulations, sample calls, and competence around product
knowledge to give confidence to recently hired staff. This was the
minimum requirement to be proficient. In terms of the essence of what
was needed, the call centre needed new hires to be able to handle calls
and be given the space to learn products and gain confidence in a
supportive environment. Did that mean knowing every line of every
script? Was the skill simply knowing how to find information very
quickly? They needed to know how to find information with agile speed
and work with their AI to find the best answers accurately and quickly.
Beyond that, what felt more important was that staff had a chance to
practice, reflect, and ask questions to gain more confidence and product
knowledge. They got to give it a go, but along with time and support to
reflect.

Of course, a more rounded, deeper learning opportunity could yield more
impressive results, but not quickly enough without taking people off the
phones. By mixing learning on the job with targeted learning support
through a range of resources on more advanced topics -- dealing with
difficult customers, for example, or dealing with talkative customers --
staff could work and learn to become even more proficient.

Their confidence was key. It is the kind of thing that comes with
experience. By regularly adding resources for staff to consider and
reflect on in their community, they could fast track. Layering in a
supportive community where they could refer questions, reflect on their
learning, and get potential problems ironed out built on the required
minimum of active learning on the job. Stakeholder buy-in around time
was key to []{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_263 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 263" role="doc-pagebreak"}success. They needed to
accept a small amount of regular learning in exchange for not having new
hires off the phones for days at a time. The short regular 'learn
breaks' of 20 minutes enabled, for example, sample calls to be listened
to and reflective questions to be posed or answered. Reflection became a
way of being.

In the call centre, they had Friday Five, where they downed tools at 5pm
for an informal review and reflective gathering at the end of the week.
The teams who joined in were rotated, given it was a call centre. They
shared stories of challenges and outcomes. They recorded these chats to
add them to their resources pool too. Collective reflection and mutual
support was a huge part of building staff confidence and respect, and,
of course, reducing the number of customer complaints as well as staff
turnover.

The value of social learning cannot be overstated in the success
achieved at the call centre, and in the 3Rs framework overall. In
[Chapter 6](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml), we saw how social learning is going
on around all of us all of the time. The opportunity for L&D to harness
that social learning sits within the referred element of the 3Rs
framework. By putting people in a community of practice or a socialised
learning group you can formalise the power of peer-to-peer learning for
the good of the organisation and for the good of the individual. People
ask their neighbours for help when they are stuck in the flow of work.
So why not formalise this a bit and give people permission to learn?
Open up more opportunities for people to ask, share and learn from each
other. Setting up referral spaces such as in an enterprise social
network, in a forum, or a regular face-to-face session pays dividends.
At Girlguiding, Slack is used for the Volunteer L&D Team, the Webinar
Trainers Team, and several
others[]{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Endnote_11_6_reference
.anchor}^[6](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Endnote_11_6)^. There
is a critical mass of people before a community gets too busy and
becomes noise. Think carefully about how you cohort people to avoid
support and referred learning from getting lost in too many people. It
depends on the context, but in my experience any more than about 20
reasonably active people is unwieldy for a small learning cohort.

Doing 3Rs right

The 3Rs framework is a lens through which to look at the development of
learning solutions. Focused on the learner and what they need, the
framework invites a layered or scaffolded approach to learning, each
layer building on the work of the previous, with the additional
potential of building a learning culture through community. Consider the
following to apply the framework to your setting:

1.  Always focus on the business need. You need to know exactly what
    people need in order to be productive in their roles, to get the
    best out of the learning experience and to implement the learning in
    the workplace. Work with your evidence, and get more if you cannot
    make strong decisions from what you have. Guesswork will not get you
    the desired results. 3Rs is informed by the evidence.

2.  []{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_264 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 264"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}The required learning must remain respectful of
    time, tools available, and, as always, focus on the learner.

3.  The required learning is enough to get by but learners should be
    further encouraged to go deeper with resources.

4.  My top tip for referrals is to model the behaviour. Perhaps hold
    back some of your resources to feed to your advocates so that they
    can share them with their peer group. Support and encourage the
    community to ensure people feel safe and welcome to share their
    learning vulnerabilities.

</aside>

<figure id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_UFigure_11_4" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF004.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_UFigure_11_9" class="figure"
aria-describedby="_14_CHAPTER_C11_UFigure_11_9_details">
<p><img src="content/images/M14UF001.png"
alt="The figure shows 4 clusters of factors." /></p>
<details id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_UFigure_11_9_details">
<summary>
Figure details
</summary>
<p>The factors are as follows:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Mindset: clarity of purpose, learner-centered, concise thinking,
focused thinking</p></li>
<li><p>Skillset: ability to be concise, laser focused, understanding
accessibility in learning</p></li>
<li><p>Toolset: online platforms, social networks, digital communities,
communities of practice, Post it notes, a lot of them</p></li>
<li><p>Dataset: aims and objectives, anticipated outcomes, business
measurable, online community data</p></li>
</ul>
</details>
</figure>

<aside aria-label="Tip (11.3)" class="tip" id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_sec_005" role="complementary">

<figure id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_UFigure_11_5" class="figure">
<p><span id="14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_265" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 265" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF005.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_UTable_11_2" class="table">
<p><a href="#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_sec_006">Skip
table</a></p>
<div class="table" role="table" tabindex="0">
<table class="left">
<tbody>
<tr>
<th scope="col"><p>Tweet</p></th>
<th scope="col"><p>Tips checklist</p></th>
</tr>

<tr>
<td><p>02-Feb-15 Don’t be afraid to try something new, reflect and try
again. Collaborative reflection can be really effective
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>The power of reflective collaboration</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>24-Mar-15 Been on a course or to a conference? Think about the
application of any learning in your business context. Reflection is key.
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Application of learning through
reflection</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>31-Mar-15 Build thinking time into learning programmes. This
video might help spark ideas #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Build in time for each element</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>15-Jun-15 Know what your motivation is, or learning simply will
not take place #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Offer motivation with resources &amp;
community</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>17-Jul-15 Share reflections on work in a team meeting to teach
others &amp; embed knowledge. Try recording for future use
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Referred learning in person or online</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>16-Sep-15 Agility &amp; pace are vital skills for L&amp;Ders.
Think of agile responses to all situations to build your ideas
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Think agile for the 3Rs framework</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>25-Sep-15 RSA make excellent videos with tool Videoscribe. Be
inspired for your video content #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Creation and curation are key</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>13-Oct-15 Feedback can be tough to give and tougher to receive
but without it we cannot grow. Practise what you preach
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Build feedback loops in too</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>20-Nov-15 Welcome conversation, invite collaboration, seek
advocates. You need an army of support to climb a mountain
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Help learners find their tribe</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>14-Dec-15 As we enter our last week of #NoPlasters let’s reflect
of the best tips of the year. Firstly, stay close to the
business</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Always stay closely aligned</strong></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
</figure>

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (11.4)" class="box" id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_sec_006" role="complementary">

<figure id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_UFigure_11_6" class="figure">
<p><span id="14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_266" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 266" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF006.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   How purposeful is your learning offer? Does it focus on your
    learners?

-   What is the appetite for required learning? Do people want the bare
    minimum and then get on with their day? Where do they do their
    networking and reflecting? Reflect on a better blend.

-   How are your asset curation and creation skills? What more do you
    need to offer useful resources?

-   Are your learners willing sharers and good peer-to-peer supporters?
    How can you encourage them to be?

-   Consider what communities you belong to and how they add value to
    your life. Consider what value a learning community can add to the
    culture of your learners.

-   If you were to draw your learning offer in pictures, what would it
    look like? Is that what it needs to look like for your context?

-   Which learning models influence your thinking? Do they suit your
    context?

-   What work is there to be done on a learning culture in your
    organisation?

-   Which learning design models influence your thinking? Do they suit
    your context?

-   Do you offer any reflection time in your learning programmes? How
    does this affect your learners?

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (11.5)" class="box" id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_sec_007" role="complementary">

<figure id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_UFigure_11_7" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF007.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Consider the 3Rs framework in retrospect in the context of a
    successful and a less successful learning programme that you have
    organised or attended to reflect on doing things differently.

-   []{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_267 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 267"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}Check out learning models that could influence
    your thinking. Consider building your own framework to suit your
    context.

-   The 3Rs framework pushes towards a learning culture to sense check
    what more is needed. Reflect on where your learning culture is.

-   Build learning with the learner at the heart.

-   Play around with stripped back learning. Practise skills of brevity.

-   Ask learners about all the ways they learn to create and curate
    resources that suit them.

-   Build community and sustain it with continued resources, engagement
    and encourage referred content from the community.

-   Deep learning is not just about passing the test, but for some that
    is all they want to do. Square this circle by offering required,
    resourced and referred learning in your workplace.

</aside>

::: {#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_sec_008 .section .references .bibliography aria-label="THE LIBRARY LIST (11.6)" role="doc-bibliography"}
<figure id="_14_CHAPTER_C11_UFigure_11_8" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF008.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Blaschke, L M (2012) Heutagogy and lifelong learning, *International
    Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning* \[online\]
    [[www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/1076]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/1076)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/3VBU-JKTV]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/3VBU-JKTV))

-   CIPD (2010) Learning and the brain, *CIPD* \[online\]
    [[www.cipd.co.uk/Images/7558-neuroscience-infographic-FINAL_tcm18-24930.pdf]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.cipd.co.uk/Images/7558-neuroscience-infographic-FINAL_tcm18-24930.pdf)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/TL4L-E3ZN]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/TL4L-E3ZN))

-   Collins, S (2016) *Neuroscience for Learning and Development*, Kogan
    Page, London

-   Covey, S. (2020) *The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People*, Simon &
    Schuster, New York

-   Davachi, L, Kiefer, T, Rock, D and Rock, L (2010) *Learning that
    lasts through AGES*, *NeuroLeadership Journal*. Issue 3.
    [[www.neuroleadership.com/portfolio-items/learning-that-lasts-through-ages-vol-3/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.neuroleadership.com/portfolio-items/learning-that-lasts-through-ages-vol-3/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/ML37-H82F]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/ML37-H82F))

-   Ferguson, O and Scott, S (2016) *Google It: The secret online lives
    of UK managers*, GoodPractice, Edinburgh

-   Kondo, M (2011) *The Life-Changing Magic of Tidying*, Vermilion,
    London

-   []{#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml_page_268 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 268"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}Mind Tools (n.d.) Gagne's Nine Levels of
    Learning, *Mind Tools* \[online\]
    [[www.mindtools.com/pages/article/gagne.htm]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/gagne.htm)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/ZH9Y-XAYU]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/ZH9Y-XAYU))

-   Pink, D (2009) *Drive*, Canongate Books, Edinburgh

-   Pink, D (2010) Drive: The surprising truth about what motivates us,
    *YouTube* \[online\]
    [[www.youtube.com/watch?v=u6XAPnuFjJc]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u6XAPnuFjJc)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/GJ6C-GWNH]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/GJ6C-GWNH))
:::

::: {#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_sec_009 .section .endnotes aria-labelledby="_14_CHAPTER_C11_h1_009"}
# Notes {#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_h1_009 .title}

[1](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Endnote_11_1_reference) Robert
Gagne's nine steps of instruction is an instructional design model:
[[www.instructionaldesign.org/theories/conditions-learning/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.instructionaldesign.org/theories/conditions-learning/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/9TN5-X28D]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/9TN5-X28D))

[2](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Endnote_11_2_reference) The
Toyota Motor Company's 5 Whys technique from Sakichi Toyoda,
[[www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newTMC_5W.htm]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newTMC_5W.htm)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/EJP3-8ZC2]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/EJP3-8ZC2))

[3](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Endnote_11_3_reference)
Driscoll's model is very popular. This is one link of many describing
it:
[[www.allassignmenthelp.co.uk/blog/driscoll-model-of-reflection/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.allassignmenthelp.co.uk/blog/driscoll-model-of-reflection/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/3C6U-WR5H]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/3C6U-WR5H))

[4](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Endnote_11_4_reference) The
heutagogical approach is explained here and also in [Chapter
9](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml):
[[www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/1076/2113]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/1076/2113)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/VF95-3VY5]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/VF95-3VY5))

[5](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Endnote_11_5_reference) This
article comparing a variety of instructional design models is useful:
[[www.dashe.com/blog/instructional-design-models-comparing-addie-bloom-gagne-merrill]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.dashe.com/blog/instructional-design-models-comparing-addie-bloom-gagne-merrill)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/Q978-CBES]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/Q978-CBES))

[6](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml__14_CHAPTER_C11_Endnote_11_6_reference) Slack,
[[www.slack.com/intl/en-gb/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.slack.com/intl/en-gb/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/QRS3-TB68]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/QRS3-TB68))
:::

[]{#15_PART_P03.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

:::: {#15_PART_P03.xhtml__15_PART_P03_sec_001 .section .part .part aria-labelledby="_15_PART_P03_h1_001" role="doc-part"}
<div>

[]{#15_PART_P03.xhtml_page_269 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 269"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[[Part]{.label .label} [Three]{.ordinal
.ordinal}](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_15_PART_P03_sec_001)

# [Strategies](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_15_PART_P03_sec_001) {#15_PART_P03.xhtml__15_PART_P03_h1_001 .title}

</div>

The final three chapters are a reminder to us that L&D sits within a
wider organisational structure, with its competing priorities and
expectations. These chapters need to be read keeping your own particular
context in mind. Whilst the rest of this book gives suggestions and
ideas of ways to approach L&D, this part recognises your unique and
differentiated circumstances which will help or hinder L&D. Looking at
the evolution or revolution of learning, you are then invited to reflect
and do good thinking. And we end the book with a reminder to celebrate
successes and not take it all too seriously. Life is for living, and in
living we learn.[]{#15_PART_P03.xhtml_page_270 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 270" role="doc-pagebreak"}
::::

[]{#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

<div>

[]{#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml_page_271 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 271"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[[12]{.ordinal
.ordinal}](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_16_CHAPTER_C12_sec_001)

# [Evolution or Revolution?](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_16_CHAPTER_C12_sec_001) {#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml__16_CHAPTER_C12_h1_001 .title}

Understanding your context in order to know how to approach modernising
your workplace learning strategy

</div>

<figure id="_16_CHAPTER_C12_UFigure_12_1" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF001.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

As I have worked with a lot of clients throughout my career, I have
noticed that change in L&D strategy happens in one of two ways. There is
either a steady evolutionary shift in working practices around learning
over time, or there is a revolution. Those revolutions are sparked by a
dire need, or a groundswell from below. I have yet to see a senior
leadership team lead the charge to a full-on revolution in learning. I
know a few really strong leaders in L&D who have shaken things up, but
even they are restrained by the evolutionary pace dictated by the
context of their organisations.

You may be wondering what a revolution in L&D strategy looks like. Or
what evolutionary L&D looks like. What I have observed is that a
revolution in L&D occurs when a dramatic shift takes place in an
organisation's approach to workplace learning. Revolutions are usually
reactive. They happen when they have to; people realise that what
they're doing currently is not the best thing to be doing for their
business, in terms of context, aims, or strategy. They realise there
needs to be a major and swift shift.

A revolution may also happen when there is not enough L&D provision
within an organisation. People seek out their own path, their own tools,
and they create socialised learning amongst themselves. As these methods
become more successful than the official routes, those official routes
fall by the wayside and L&D is ignored. I have seen this happen when
organisations do not provide any learning tech -- people use consumer
tech to fill the void. I []{#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml_page_272 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 272" role="doc-pagebreak"}have seen this happen in
departments, when a manager spends time and budget on ensuring their
teams get the learning they need, often leading L&D more strongly than
the rest of the organisation (including the L&D department!).
Eventually, cake theory (see [Chapter 3](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml)) kicks
in and everyone else wants what that department has, hence a revolution.
Although in this case, it is more an evolution in one space that
permeates into another.

In essence, an evolution in L&D practice is a more slow-moving process.
It can manifest in a variety of ways, but goes almost unnoticed. For
example, this can happen when an organisation decides to undergo a tiny
trial to see how things progress and let the situation develop. They
take it slowly; they move at the pace the organisation can cope with and
accept. And like any evolution, it reforms the DNA of the learning offer
surreptitiously, but potentially unrecognisably.

The reality is that it isn't always a straight choice between evolution
and revolution. There is often the need for somewhere in between the
two. You may need to overhaul one area of learning on a grand scale,
whereas other areas are left to morph at a more natural pace. The whole
reason for considering these approaches is strategic; to help you
understand your organisation in depth to establish what is best, at what
speed any change needs to take, and how drastic it needs to be. In
addition to the type of change needed, the response and impact of that
response to change needs to be
considered[]{#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml__16_CHAPTER_C12_Endnote_12_1_reference
.anchor}^[1](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml__16_CHAPTER_C12_Endnote_12_1)^.

I am not advocating for one or the other approach in this book. It is up
to you to decide whether it's gradual change or wholesale change that
your business needs. Individual circumstances will dictate which route
you need to take after careful consideration of all the elements we have
looked at over the course of this book. Context is everything here. This
chapter exists to help you understand and think about what your
circumstances are in order to decide whether it's evolution or
revolution that you need in your L&D strategy.

Whichever route you need to take, it's important to remember that
nothing stays the same. Ever. Even if you are going for evolution,
significant change may be just around the corner for your organisation,
meaning that you have to speed up, ramp up, and shift direction. In an
ideal world, you wouldn't need to react to a crisis situation with an
overhaul of L&D, but as 2020 has shown us, anything can happen.
Sometimes we have no choice.

Wherever you are at now, you need to understand your organisational
context as the parameters of your L&D strategy are held within it. What
will be clear is what needs to shift within your organisation in order
for L&D to stay relevant and add value. Understanding your burning
platforms, and the pace of acceptable shift, is absolutely key to
understanding whether []{#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml_page_273 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 273" role="doc-pagebreak"}you need to revolutionise
your L&D and do something radically different or whether step change at
an evolutionary pace is more appropriate for your organisation.

<figure id="_16_CHAPTER_C12_UFigure_12_2" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF002.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

[Choosing evolutionary or revolutionary
L&D](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_16_CHAPTER_C12_h3_001)

I've heard the words 'unprecedented change' many times over my career as
a result of world events. In recent history, we have worked through and
with the after-effects of the Asia financial crisis in 1997, the 9/11
attacks in 2001, the 7/7 attacks in 2005, the financial crash of 2007,
the Brexit vote in 2016, #MeToo from 2018 and most recently Covid-19 in
2020. All these events have switched the focus or created absolute need
for L&D, our learners, and their workplaces. Perhaps despite all this
recent history, never before has the debate surrounding evolution and
revolution in learning resonated quite so strongly as now. We have had a
Covid-19-induced digital revolution, whether we wanted it or not. Huge
swathes of the population began working and learning from home, many of
them for the first time. This had huge implications for L&D teams, and
will continue to do so moving forward.

It is fair to assume that some of the revolutions precipitated by
Covid-19, such as a shift to flexible working or digital learning, would
have happened anyway, though perhaps not at such speed and scale. They
were set for an evolutionary trajectory. It's too early to understand
what changes to working practices and attitudes will remain and what
will return to 'normal', but this will have implications for L&D's
approach to evolution or revolution. What happens when we are in the
new, 'new normal'? How many of those first-time home workers will go
back to the office? How many face-to-face classrooms will we ever need
again? Perhaps more of you will decide to go down the revolution path
than would have otherwise? Perhaps Covid-19 has made revolutionaries of
us all? Perhaps 'normal' was always simply an illusion?

The only normal thing for any one of us is that there will continue to
be significant shifts for us to adapt to. In my opinion, we can and
should have change in workplace L&D now. We have the theory, technology,
skills, and ability, but seemingly not the willingness of all the
necessary people to make []{#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml_page_274 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 274" role="doc-pagebreak"}it happen. But it doesn't
matter what I want, nor what you want either. It only ever matters what
the learners need, what the organisation can cope with, and what the
internal and the external factors enable. It is crucial to strategic
success that evolutionary L&D is given space to breathe when it needs
to, and a shake-up L&D revolution happens only when it needs to.

[Progression at the right
pace](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_16_CHAPTER_C12_h3_002)

Investigation within your organisation of its stakeholders, its purpose,
its people and its work will gear you up to understanding what is 'your
normal' for L&D. The normal types of learning, the expectations on
timings, materials, types and delivery, the acceptance of frequency and
activities, the buy-in from line managers and senior teams, and the next
steps for making the learning work; this all informs your L&D strategy.
It gets everyone on the same page about what that normality looks like
and where it needs to head in order to fulfil strategic goals. Your L&D
strategy establishes the 'new normal' for L&D, offering clarity on where
to put energy, and the speed of any change. To turn that into action,
consider how you embrace change within your organisation and how you
support change within L&D. Do you follow the natural course of evolution
to bring your strategy to fruition, or get the flags waving for a
full-on revolution of L&D to put out the fire of your burning platforms?

Progression in L&D is moving forward to more modern learning principles
and methods. We are moving away from the injection education of the
workshop classroom, where we tell people something once and expect them
to remember it when necessary. Progression means focusing on the
learner's needs rather than sheep dipping everyone through the same
learning, whether they need it or not. Progression means offering
multiple learning touch points to help people understand what they are
learning and doing. In the application of learning, we help people to
connect the learning to things they already know and do. We encourage
people to gain feedback and act on it, critiquing their work and their
learning through self-awareness. And if they can share learning with
others, this all supports their understanding. We can't do any of this
well with just seven hours in a classroom at one time. Benjamin Bloom
spelled out for us in 1956 the advantages of scaffolding learning with
his taxonomy (Stern, 2018). Jerome Bruner in 1976, influenced by Lev
Vygotsky, demonstrated to us that via a scaffolded learning approach
through the zone of proximal development, 'we learn best in a
[]{#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml_page_275 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 275"
role="doc-pagebreak"}social environment, where we construct meaning
through interaction with others' (Wheeler, 2014a).

Julian Stodd built on those ideas in 2015, blending scaffolded learning
into his whole social learning approach. Yet here we are in 2020 still
trying to get this blend of learning right. Creating multiple
modalities, multiple touch points and multiple opportunities to learn is
the evolution in learning which has been taking place for decades. It
has been a slow burn.

[Context](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_16_CHAPTER_C12_h3_003)

Look at the context of your organisation. Has there been a lot, perhaps
too much change in your organisation lately, to the extent that people
have change fatigue? Would you be asking too much, too quickly, to go
for more? If you try to press for more change than people are ready for,
then engagement with L&D could suffer. If that's the case, then go at a
pace that the organisation and the people within it are happy with. This
is when the evolutionary approach is probably best.

At the other end of the scale, you could have a workforce that wants
change, wants innovation. They might think learning in your organisation
is just about compliance, rather than developing their knowledge, skills
and behaviours to help them do their jobs better or responding to
business challenges. These people could be feeling frustrated that
development isn't happening, and frustration can easily turn to
demotivation and disengagement, plus a damaged internal reputation for
L&D. In a situation like this, an evolutionary approach is unlikely to
be quick enough, and I would argue that a revolution is probably what is
needed. Actually, if you are not quick enough to implement change in a
revolutionary approach, you may find those frustrated people do it
anyway!

[Emotions](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_16_CHAPTER_C12_h3_004)

Whenever there is change, there is emotion. Some people are comfortable
with change, whereas others may not be, especially in cases where it is
happening to them rather than with them. As change prompts a variety of
complex emotions in people, and to respect our colleagues and the impact
our L&D strategy will have on them, we must recognise and be sensitive
to the potential emotional responses to our offer and execution. A lot
goes on each day in people's everyday lives, in and out of the
workplace. In business, []{#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml_page_276 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 276" role="doc-pagebreak"}we need to acknowledge that,
and as L&Ders we need to embrace holistic self-learning.

Surfacing the reality of the emotions experienced by working people will
help determine the outcome of what you are trying to achieve in L&D. In
fact, they could make or break it. How will this change with an
evolutionary approach? Or a revolutionary approach? Are they ready for
what needs to happen? Are they motivated to learn and improve? Will they
be opposed to it? Fearful? Angry? Excited? Helping people to manage
their emotional wellbeing can enable them to cope with shift. Give
people the space to think about and express their emotions and this
could help you succeed in driving change in L&D.

To successfully drive towards an effective learning culture, you need to
know the heartbeat of your organisation, how everybody feels about the
work they do and the learning they do. You need to know how people are
feeling. You are not facilitating robots to learn. You are working with
human beings and all their complexities. Taking the emotional
temperature of your organisation and finding out what is acceptable to
people will help you decide whether it's evolution or revolution you go
for. Once you have addressed the emotive questions around change, you
can start to address the history question.

[The historical
context](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_16_CHAPTER_C12_h3_005)

History clearly plays into the culture of an organisation. Even the new
normal comes from somewhere. By knowing where you've come from, you can
work out where you're going. Whether your normal is sage on the stage,
the lecturing approach, subject matter experts or guide on the side, all
of these things need to be taken into account when developing a learning
strategy.

Here's an example:

<aside aria-label="EXAMPLE (12.1)" class="example" epub:type="practice" id="_16_CHAPTER_C12_sec_002" role="complementary">

EXAMPLE

Take the history of apprenticeships in England; in my view, the
construction of modern apprenticeships via the Apprenticeship Levy are
not nearly as revolutionary as they could have been. From launch, the
take-up of apprenticeships has been slow. Writing in December 2019,
Jonathan Moules noted in the *Financial Times*, 'Two years after its
launch, half of the companies covered by the scheme have yet to spend
anything'. It seems that []{#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml_page_277 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 277" role="doc-pagebreak"}organisations view the Levy
as a tax on business rather than a way to support business to invest in
people.

I think this is a problem with history and the connotations of the word
'apprentice'. Back in the day, apprenticeships were all about the master
and apprentice relationship. The master had all the knowledge, which
they bestowed on the apprentice over a long period of time, as described
by Vygotsky as the 'Zone of Proximal Development' (Wheeler, 2019, p108).
That is precisely the kind of model we need to move away from in L&D.

My uncle did an apprenticeship in the 1950s to become a lathe turner. As
he tells it, he stood and looked at the lathe for two whole years before
he was allowed to even touch it. Imagine, two whole years without once
touching the machine he was being trained to use! What message does this
send out? That the young person is not to be trusted and, when they are
finally trusted, they still have to be led and watched over for months
afterwards. This is the history attached to the word 'apprentice'.
Aspects of the Levy could have been made clearer: it's not just for
funding young people's learning, and its aim is to give responsibility
and learning opportunities rather than observing machine operations.

</aside>

History is important. Language is important. In my opinion, using the
word 'apprenticeship' in a modern setting, bringing with it such
historical associations, was a mistake. Perhaps this marketing mistake
is a reason for the low uptake and organisations not drawing down their
Levy funds for learning (Moules, 2019). I suggest had the Levy been
branded the 'Workplace Learning Levy', then it might have been a very
different story.

[Your history of
learning](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_16_CHAPTER_C12_h3_006)

History is only valuable in context, both the historical context and
when compared to the present day. Understanding your organisation's
history of learning is imperative, as it will influence your choices for
future learning.

When someone says 'We haven't had any training the past three months',
what do they actually mean? Is it that they haven't left their desks to
go to a classroom to do some training? Is it that they haven't had a
performance conversation with their manager? Potentially, you've got
decades of classroom-based training pushing against your willingness to
change 'how things are done around here', which is why you have to
understand the context of your organisation, recognising that people
don't find it very easy to do []{#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml_page_278
.pagebreak aria-label="Page 278" role="doc-pagebreak"}things differently
or to even conceive of doing things differently. Or you could find you
are pushing on an open door as people are desperate to break away from
their past.

Of course, there are always exceptions to the norm, such as start-ups.
If you are working in a new or even new-ish start-up, then the learning
mentality is likely going to be different as you seek to not be a staid
corporate. In such a setting, going off site to learn in a classroom
could be very different to the norm, indeed, it could be revolutionary!
Taking small, evolutionary steps could be revolutionary too -- it all
depends on your own history of learning.

[Organisational
stories](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_16_CHAPTER_C12_h3_007)

There's a bit of an art and a science to exploring the history of the
organisation. Not being constrained by the evidence should be balanced
against the need to understand the stories around that historical
background. Where we are today is as a result of where we have come
from, but shouldn't limit where we are going. Much revolves around how
the stories in your organisation are told, retold, received and revered.
Do people have rose-tinted glasses about how things used to be? Or will
they tell you about their negative experiences of training, how they
have always felt held back and frustrated that the learning didn't help
them do their jobs better?

Think about the pace of change in your organisation. If the pace of
change has felt constant, then be careful of change fatigue. Are you
hearing stories of people feeling overwhelmed, perhaps not ready for yet
more change? If the pace of change has been slow, however, then perhaps
the stories are of frustration, and they are ripe for a revolution. If
your organisation has a culture of continuous learning, then ongoing
change is accepted, expected even. It is from stories that we can hear
what pace and culture look like in your organisation. Can you match the
pace of change to the needs of the workforce?

How you tell the stories of your organisation's past and how you gather,
curate, and explore the stories will feed into whether your L&D needs a
revolution or evolution. It's important to have an open mind so that you
hear the stories as they need to be told, not as you expect to hear
them. Speaking to a wide cohort of people, of different ages,
backgrounds, status and experiences to get the full picture is also key
for understanding the strategy you need.

[]{#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml_page_279 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 279"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[Skills](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_16_CHAPTER_C12_h3_008)

Sometimes our L&D strategy is not really a matter of choice. Does your
organisation have the skills it needs? If it doesn't and there are big
skills gaps in critical areas, then the situation will dictate
revolution. Have other areas of the business undergone a revolution so
that L&D needs to catch up in order to support them? If the
organisational strategic direction has shifted fundamentally, then doing
what you've always done won't be an option -- you won't be able to
produce the skills the organisation needs in order to move forward and
put strategy into action.

You need an understanding of how quickly you can move within your
context, and why. If you need to move at an immense pace, then you have,
without a doubt, a revolution on your hands. Likewise, if you need to
shift something fundamental, such as adapting to new technology in
learning, then you are going to need a revolution. There is a generally
accepted technology adoption
curve[]{#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml__16_CHAPTER_C12_Endnote_12_2_reference
.anchor}^[2](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml__16_CHAPTER_C12_Endnote_12_2)^, so be
aware of where your organisation sits along the life cycle of that. Do
you have the keenness of early adopters, or are you going to be pushing
a revolution with a bunch of laggards?

[Recruitment](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_16_CHAPTER_C12_h3_009)

The context of recruitment in your organisation will play into your L&D
strategy, so it's important to stay in touch with your colleagues who
are responsible for it. Does the organisation favour succession
planning, or recruiting from outside? Do you need to recruit, or do you
actually need to redeploy people? What fits best with your
organisation's needs and timescales? Once skills gaps are identified, it
could be that redeploying people into different areas of the business
and recruiting new people in is the answer. Both options create learning
needs, but you will need to adapt your L&D strategy differently to
ongoing development. You can only make an informed and useful decision
on evolution or revolution if you acknowledge a wider business direction
regarding what is required.

As L&D people, we are obviously not going to be doing the actual
recruitment work, but, as you can see, it is important that the
different departments work together as a whole organisation, closely and
fruitfully. Perhaps this in itself is the revolution story of L&D in
your organisation. Whatever happens, knowing what other functions are
doing (particularly in HR), and why, is very important. If you are out
of kilter with what's happening more []{#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml_page_280
.pagebreak aria-label="Page 280" role="doc-pagebreak"}widely, then you
could be wasting your time and efforts on the wrong things, which won't
do your internal standing any good either. For example, say you set out
your stall for revolution, saying we need to upskill everybody, but the
wider decision has already been made to redeploy people. What then? Does
it look as if you don't really know what's going on? That you don't have
the ear of the senior leadership team? That you're out of touch?

There should be no misunderstandings or ambiguities between your L&D
strategy and what your organisation is aiming to achieve in relation to
recruitment and wider organisational goals. If you are looking for a
dramatic, drastic shift in your approach to workplace learning, then you
need to know that it will work within the context of your organisation.

[Normalising digital
learning](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_16_CHAPTER_C12_h3_010)

What became abundantly clear during 2020 was that the normalising of
digital technology is already well underway. As I have said before,
consumer-grade tech is streets ahead of business-based tech, and has
been for some time. When you're thinking about the historical piece, you
can't ignore the social history that tells us how humans behave -- human
beings are incredibly resilient, resourceful, and always seek out new
ways of doing things. Digital learning has happened already for people;
it is just that L&D hasn't perhaps been involved. The revolution already
happened, in an evolutionary way.

Does this mean L&D are too late to the party? Did we miss our chance to
influence the story? I don't think so. I believe it means organisations
are actually more ready for a learning revolution than we might expect.
Take the revolution that happened during Covid-19. There was a dramatic
shift in our workplace learning, and we did it, we made it happen. Many
organisations missed out the evolutionary steps that would have happened
under normal circumstances. A more usual evolutionary approach would be
something like a change from face-to-face learning to a learning
management system, to e-learning to individual digital assets, to
blended learning to a learning experience platform; a series of
progressive steps that take the learner along a gradual journey.

But, with a revolution, it's more like moving from face-to-face learning
to a digital blend on a learning experience platform. You don't have to
go through all those individual steps. It is fine to go from
face-to-face to a virtual classroom without have implemented e-learning,
for example. Or to go []{#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml_page_281 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 281" role="doc-pagebreak"}from click-next e-learning
straight to VR without having to move to digital resources first. It
could even be straight from face-to-face to full 100 per cent digital.
It has been done. The CIPD, for example, did so in 2016, when it
partnered with Avado (then Home Learning College) to produce the first
100 per cent digital qualification for L&D at Level 5. They didn't take
lots of gradual steps. They went for full-scale change, and it worked.
L&D progression doesn't have to be linear; it is always about meeting
the strategic goals in the best way needed for your learners.

[Your 'why' and business
case](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_16_CHAPTER_C12_h3_011)

The trajectory of evolution and revolution in L&D depends on why there's
a need for learning in the first place. Are you clear on what is the
'why' for your organisation? Perhaps it's sustained and sustainable
behaviour change? Perhaps it's box-ticking compliance and mandatory
training? Perhaps it's a change of strategic direction? Just as Simon
Sinek suggests, we must always start with 'why' (Sinek, 2011). It is
here we need to start building our next crucial step; the business case
for a new direction in L&D.

By working through the chapters in Part 1 of this book, you should have
a pretty strong understanding of your why. Building your business case
from that foundation will set you in good stead. For a successful
business case, the decision makers need to see that there is solid
thought behind it, so be sure to provide your evidence in a way they can
identify with. Don't just dump a bunch of stats on a page; help the
decision makers quickly make sense of the numbers. Clarity on outcomes
is very important too. All too often a successful business case comes
down to what the 'bang for buck' is, so demonstrating return on
investment and expectations are paramount.

By reflecting on the thoughts shared in this chapter alongside your own
context, you will be led towards a stronger L&D strategy. Your direction
will be decided on the basis of an evidence-informed strategy. Both of
these will inform the basis for your business case to get your
organisation on board. Never underestimate the internal marketing
required to bring your L&D strategy to life as you sell your new
direction to those around you. A watertight business case has all the
answers to all the stakeholders' doubts and fears, and their hopes and
expectations too. It is your ticket to evolution or revolution.

<aside aria-label="Case-Study (12.2)" class="case-study" epub:type="case-study" id="_16_CHAPTER_C12_sec_003" role="complementary">

<figure id="_16_CHAPTER_C12_UFigure_12_3" class="figure">
<p><span id="16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml_page_282" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 282" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF003.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

Perry Timms, author of *Transformational HR* (2018) and *The Energized
Workplace* (2020), advocates for human-centred workplaces. He and I have
often discussed better ways to do work and the L&D strategy that goes
alongside that. Here, he has generously shared his thoughts on
Vigilance, Design Thinking and Responsive Pace for game-changing L&D
with his client case studies in order to further challenge your thinking
on evolutionary or revolutionary L&D strategy.

**THE HOLY TRINITY OF GAME CHANGING L&D**

**by Perry Timms**

Game changers in L&D is an easy tag to use, but a more complex set of
circumstances that give rise to truly changing the game. Who has done
it? How did they do it? What was the prompt or provocation that caused
them to do it? My experiences are that this rarely exists in one L&D
team; the essence of this may exist but the actualisation of it is
normally in parts of L&D teams.

The essence of a game-changing L&D team then starts with understanding
what the game now is, and, thereby, the changes that are that needed,
and why they are the changes.

Much has been written and talked about on L&D conference stages of the
need to become performance consultants. I will eschew this tag and
instead focus on this, not through a trendy label, but more as a set of
sensibilities. These are not competencies, skills, or even mindsets. A
sensibility is defined as 'the quality of being able to appreciate and
respond to complex emotional or aesthetic influences; sensitivity'.

So here's my DNA of the game-changing L&D function and practitioner plus
some examples of where I've experienced that in the modern world of
people and organisation development.

Sensibility 1 -- Vigilance

The need to learn something is sparked by a deficit; a problem that
cannot be tackled with existing mindsets or abilities. This deficit is
described as a 'disability' at an organisational level by MIT's Peter
Senge's work on the 'Fifth Discipline' This is often called the learning
need. And many L&D practitioners will apply a Learning Needs
[]{#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml_page_283 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 283"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Analysis (LNA), which looks into the cause of the
deficit. It also looks to set out what the desired outcome is to create
a 'destination' for the learning intervention: close the gap, reduce or
eliminate the deficit, and achieve something. This, in my view, is the
first flaw. We take an almost forensic approach to the issue and analyse
what is the need. We may sometimes look further upstream to what caused
this need or created this gap, but we are often myopic on the immediate
need.

It is my assertion that if L&D game changers are vigilant enough, they
are either:

1.  Already working on this from an 'upstream' perspective and know the
    causal trail before the identification of the issue arises.

2.  More analytical on the focal point of their investigation and
    diagnosis. They use more data; have more of a story already in mind
    about the eco-system this issue operates in.

Our instinct is to fix people. L&D is effectively a 'software patch' on
a piece of bug-riddled code. What it often doesn't appear to be is a
rewritten programme using a range of information stacks and not just a
quick fix. Vigilant practitioners would be like the programmer who
rarely takes helpdesk calls, but is constantly attending to new ways to
make the code and architecture of a digital programme perform well and
adapt to new data feeds, user experience needs, and data cleansing,
storage and retrieval issues.

Hackers of data to influence voting preferences are vigilant. Vigilant
to know where people consume content; how to write persuasive messages
that influence their opinions and then amplify that with more and more
learning activities and connections that force that view further into
being forged. If this exists in this manipulative way, it should also
exist for the good of high performance, problem-solving and more
anticipation of need and gap closure. So the vigilant L&D professional
is never caught out as a \`first responder\' to fix such deficits and
disabilities. It is more a holistic healer that builds agency for
development in their people. This is achieved through vigilance.

Who does this well?

My experience of the Royal Bank of Scotland's learning team is precisely
that. They pay attention to people's well-being through an
infrastructure that is secure and personalised but which helps people
with stress levels, blood pressure, BMI, and more. There is then a suite
of recommendations to learn new ways to exercise, around nutrition,
managing energy and workloads, paying attention to personal wellness,
and finding who in the organisation can help them. Walking meetings are
common across their HQ. RBS is also experimenting with new forms of
digital learning using avatar-based AI interfaces and a vast range of
development content that is accessible to people at their convenience.
In essence, RBS HR and L&D are vigilant at a higher level
[]{#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml_page_284 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 284"
role="doc-pagebreak"}of personal agency to help people there derive
their own learning pathways and development choices.

Tips to be more vigilant

-   Research and awareness are the only ways to foster a more vigilant
    approach to providing strategic L&D products and services.

-   Look to science, art, technology, medicine, consumer trends, and
    more, to understand people's habits, preferences and choices in how
    they access, consume, learn, and apply new things.

-   Spend time being vigilant and less time responding to orders. Create
    a manifesto that is linked to strategic and humane objectives that
    are arguably more powerful than short-term fixes: the 'no more
    plasters' approach that Michelle Parry-Slater, as the author of this
    book, talks about extensively.

Sensibility 2 -- Design Thinking

With a strong argument that we are already an 'audience of one',
consumers are creating either an actual -- or perceived -- choice of
individuality and, therefore, customer loyalty. We like to feel and be
different, yet affiliated.

Design Thinking as a concept does this. It achieves this through being
oriented to experience over simply the creation of a product. It is a
solution that has more to it than an single-function commodity.

With its eternally looping pathway, Design Thinking is fast becoming a
go-to skill in all areas of business life and not just in the commercial
world of products. Person-centred care is Design Thinking in another
guise. Student-centred learning is the Design Thinking version of
developmental education.

So how do we use Design Thinking in L&D? Design Thinking is made up of a
flexible but directive set of principles in a number of stages. First,
you have the act that comes before you design a solution -- the issue.
What Design Thinking doesn't do is help you identify that. It helps you
refine and smarten it, but 'it' exists. We can use an example like a new
form of Graduate Fast Stream but for people who haven\'t come to the
organisation through a university -- more a social mobility issue of
someone who has taken a different approach to come to your workforce.
That is already the issue. The deficit. You have to assume that this
group of people will have different needs, back-stories and mindsets to
those who come off the University production line.

Design Thinking, therefore, starts with a stage of understanding 'them'
more. People are often called 'users' in this space because they are
users of the product/service you build as a result of this methodology.
So, we look at our users and take an empathy-based approach to
understanding them. We step into their world. We see things through
their eyes, feel the sensations, tensions and excitement in their world.
It's a product-based version of anthropology and psychology. You may
create several []{#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml_page_285 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 285" role="doc-pagebreak"}personas or user stories for
the users you are working to help, so you build a character-based
profile of them to better understand them beyond simply being an
end-user of your product. But ultimately, you want them to be the
active, enthused and outcome-deriving users of your product.

It then rolls through some data and analysis on the situation you are
building your product into. What do you already know about this 'arena'?
What data sets do you have about the experiences of the people you
identified through your empathy process? You need to ask these questions
so that you can define that need, issue, gap and user profile with more
insight, evidence and a linked series of events.

You are now ready to ideate. Create new thinking using the uniquely
human approaches of dreaming, using imagination and building a potential
new solution to close the gap, solve the problem, and eliminate the
deficit.

We then turn our attention to three stages that will be a little more
familiar to us: prototype (some will say pilot); test (run it and expect
it to fail in part but learn from it), and, eventually, launch and
deploy.

What is useful about Design Thinking is that the process loops back to
where it needs to. If it failed because you had some misaligned elements
to your empathy process, you can go and re-emphasise. Revisit your
assumptions and aspects of your personas. You can then test that with
more defined data and evidence to validate your new assertions and then
ideate on those specifics. This is the prototype again: test and learn
and/or deploy.

Who does this well?

River Island have pioneered a range of HR, OD and L&D-related activities
which have won awards and are lauded as great case studies. Over the
last three plus years, River Island has centred its HR proposition on
the concept of *People Experience*. Essentially, this is a Design
Thinking approach to HR writ-large. Across the entire lifecycle and
episodes in people's ongoing relationship with their work, significant
differences have been created in -- of particular note for L&D -- the
RIVA platform for online learning.

Now, online learning is nothing new. However, RIVA is a platform with
content, exercises, activities, a community and a range of content and
pathways commensurate with that vigilance I talked about in my first
example. Busy store staff, mobile distribution staff and specialised
artistic designers and commercially sensitive buyers: this platform
creates an ecosystem that serves a range of needs and specific demands
in a manner that can be consumed by those not sat at a desk, and able to
easily drop into a classroom, or at a desktop screen to click through
learning.

River Island is a Design Thinking exemplar and a gimmick-free pillar of
an organisation that is learning and operates in one of the harshest
environments in retail -- High Street fashion.

[]{#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml_page_286 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 286"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Tips to use Design Thinking.

-   Understand and apply the methodology in new ventures. Use the
    empathy part incessantly.

-   Apply it to already 'successful' interventions to see what could be
    improved further without even being asked to do so.

-   Experiment, fail, and experiment some more.

Sensibility 3 -- Responsive Pace

Speed is of the essence in a hyper-fast world of change, new platforms
and channels, and a digital deluge of information.

It's not really speed, though, as that can be reckless and create more
problems for the solution than it was designed to solve. So it's pace
(though velocity is used in Agile development). Pace means you are
rapid, quick, but not foolhardy about that velocity.

Whilst there is pace, it is about being responsive in that way. Not just
pacy for the sake of it. But in response to an urgency, a need and a
real chance that if you don\'t capitalise on an opportunity with enough
pace, you will lose that chance and then even more problems occur out of
that lost opportunity. In being responsive you are not being just
reactive. Responsive to need, demand, trend.

I go nuts with the lag, delay, and lack of pace in most areas of
business. And in many cases, L&D has become stuck in that traffic lane
too. I ran a Hackathon in Slovenia, and one team came up with a macro
hack for innovation. It was so simple, but so telling too. It was that
anyone can come up with an innovation for the company and that managers
had 48 hours to intervene, else it just 'happened'. A beautiful
subversion of the normal slowness of permission-seeking that chokes
innovation at source and is overly protective of power positions.

L&D is stifled by bureaucracy and some of that is unfortunately
self-inflicted. So to make sure we are not sclerotic with our processes,
we need to be optimised on how and where we spend our time. In this
respect, we have to look at how the digital technology profession has
recalibrated itself from huge project frameworks (mostly designed to
build transport infrastructure not database systems) to Agile.

Agile is very trendy. Indeed, every company, from tiny start-ups to
banking giants, is talking up being more agile. There are, though,
several pitfalls to this, especially if in reality you have no desire to
let go of your comfort blanket of lumbering process.

Agile really consists of two parts: a mindset and a methodology.

First, the mindset. In order to be agile, you have to let go; as a
leader, particularly. Letting go includes comforting processes,
well-established rituals, beliefs about how things ought to be done, and
the relationships people have with each other in doing work.

[]{#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml_page_287 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 287"
role="doc-pagebreak"}You have to be more liberating. Let people find
their way rather than telling them what to do. Learning and continuous
improvement are key elements of an agile mindset, but the openness and
willingness to see people be more accountable and not managed is vital.
It requires leaps of faith and a sense-check of ego. It isn't easy to
let this happen yet if you want to create capacity, enhance capability
you have to stop smothering and parenting your people and let them
mature and stand on their own two feet.

Once you have mastered the sense of a different mental model, you can
then apply the methodology. If you try the methodology without the
mindset shift, it will stutter and probably fail.

The methodology is critical in several ways, but the most staggering is
inclusion and the next most staggering is pace.

Inclusion means people are self-selected, self-directed, and
self-reliant. It means you don't pick a team; they pick themselves. And
this opens up to people previously felt to be too junior, too
inexperienced, or too distant from the corporate strategy. Yet it's
precisely the people who are nearest to customer or colleague problems
that you want to solve issues and create solutions.

Pace is where you reinvent all the processes you're used to and remove
them to allow for a new set of iterative, creative, yet evidence-based
and compliant hacks, shortcuts and lean approaches.

I've seen six-month projects in learning to create a new digital
programme delivered in six weeks. I've seen people have a sense of focus
and a realisation that there is such a thing as 'enough for now' to
enable progress and not get lost in the inboxes and meeting schedules of
others to delay production, assessment and adaptation. I've seen early
tests of products and solutions that enable responsive change and a
quicker route to a finalised product. I've seen more cohesion in teams,
because the processes and tasks are atomised, simplified, and not
linear.

Who does this well?

Sky's People Experience team have mastered this to go beyond being an
order-taking learning function and into a supreme consulting and pacy,
solution-building internal consultancy. Led through this with a
conviction-based leader in Tracey Waters, the team at Sky have become a
touchpoint for Agile and Agile mindset and methodology.

Tips for using Agile

-   Clear the way to being more Agile by finding leaders who want to
    'sponsor' this way of being and working.

-   Just do it. Learn in the moment and be messy but analytical about
    your early attempts and refine, refine, refine. It's a never perfect
    method, which is why it's perfect.

[]{#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml_page_288 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 288"
role="doc-pagebreak"}In summary

Vigilance, Design Thinking and Pace form my 'holy trinity' of
game-changing L&D. They're not as tight a definition as Instructional
Design, and they're not even as model-like as 70:20:10. They are
sensibilities more than competencies, but there are skills, behaviours
and attitudes in all of them that need some form of internal assessment,
intent and application to become proficient and confident in these
areas. They can be traced back to CIPD Profession Map standards and LPI
skills frameworks, so there's learning industry credibility, I feel.
Mostly, they are energising and clarifying actions that this chaotic
world of work and learning is in desperate need of.

If you want to change the game, you often have to be in the game to do
so. That doesn't mean you have to overly compromise or just deal with
inefficiencies or the inadequacies you see. You have to find better
ways, experiment, get the evidence of success and then press on.
Recognition and interest normally follow. Beware of the 'hype trap' that
people might accuse you of being in. But just because something is new
and interest is high doesn't mean it is a fad. If it's adding true
value, then it's legitimate and the deniers and critical players will
have to find another target for their challenges.

Overall though, the world of L&D and work needs more game-changing minds
with applied ways and proof of impact. We'll never get anywhere doing
the same thing and choking all innovation before it has even had the
chance to prove its merit.

So my advice is to change the game. If not you, then who?

**The Case Study Reflections**

*Perry's contribution to this book speaks for itself. However, like
anything you read, hear or watch, having your own response set in your
own context is important. Here are my reflections for your
consideration, having thought of your own:*

-   *The Holy Trinity offered here is not your usual L&D mindset or
    toolset. One of the reasons I am drawn to Perry Timms' work is the
    encouragement to look at things from a different angle.*

-   *The pace is very interesting to me in light of the evolution versus
    revolution debate. Do we wait for the right L&D intervention at the
    right time, or do we just get in there and intervene? To wait feels
    like the easy road, yet to rush in wholly depends on context.*

-   *The mindset and methodologies discussed remind me that so much of
    the work to shift L&D is about the mental energy to do so. Changing
    mindsets is hard. But we must.*

-   *The final challenge from Timms here is everything -- if not you,
    then who? We need to own our role in changing L&D within our
    organisations.*

</aside>

<figure id="_16_CHAPTER_C12_UFigure_12_4" class="figure">
<p><span id="16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml_page_289" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 289" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF004.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_16_CHAPTER_C12_UFigure_12_9" class="figure"
aria-describedby="_16_CHAPTER_C12_UFigure_12_9_details">
<p><img src="content/images/M16UF001.png"
alt="The figure shows 4 clusters of factors." /></p>
<details id="_16_CHAPTER_C12_UFigure_12_9_details">
<summary>
Figure details
</summary>
<p>The factors are as follows:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Mindset: patient, brave, risk taking, confident, determined,
agile, flexible, open minded, forward thinking, Kaizen approach,
iterative</p></li>
<li><p>Skillset: working at pace, agile, creative, digital,
facilitative, negotiation, communication</p></li>
<li><p>Toolset: agile methodology, Kaizen principles, survey tools,
feedback models</p></li>
<li><p>Dataset: all the data you can find</p></li>
</ul>
</details>
</figure>

<aside aria-label="Tip (12.3)" class="tip" id="_16_CHAPTER_C12_sec_005" role="complementary">

<figure id="_16_CHAPTER_C12_UFigure_12_5" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF005.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_16_CHAPTER_C12_UTable_12_1" class="table">
<p><a href="#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml__16_CHAPTER_C12_sec_006">Skip
table</a></p>
<div class="table" role="table" tabindex="0">
<table class="left">
<thead>
<tr>
<th scope="col"><p>Tweet</p></th>
<th scope="col"><p>Tips checklist</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><p>29-Jan-15 Normalise learning as every day by having managers ask
teams what was learnt today + sharing their learning
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Work alongside managers</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>11-Feb-15 Evolution or change can be tough on those driving it.
Keep going. It’s #WorthIt #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Stay strong and believe in your cause</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>18-Feb-15 Create learning with an authentic voice. Teams need to
be able to recognise themselves in all training to contextualise
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Reflect your org in your learning</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><span id="16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml_page_290" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 290" role="doc-pagebreak"></span> 19-Feb-15 Make a
start putting learning into a blended approach with simple pre- &amp;
post-course work. Build from there #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Start simple and build</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>27-Feb-15 If you hit resistance, stop pushing, relax, rethink and
find another way to make your ideas happen #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Take time to reset</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>21-May-15 In times of evolution, be kind to yourself. Look out
for you, to gain strength to progress. Pace yourself
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Pace yourself as your org needs you to</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>04-Jun-15 Evolution of L&amp;D is easier with advocates. Chat to
people, build relationships to ensure your changes succeed
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Evolution is easier with advocates</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>10-Jun-15 Help your org’s L&amp;D evolution progress with
@TowardsMaturity Benchmark #NoPlasters #BeTheBest15</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Track your progress with a benchmark</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>08-Jul-15 Use evidence to persuade stakeholders of the need for
evolution in L&amp;D. Use @TowardsMaturity &amp; @CIPD research
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Stakeholders like evidence for
revolution</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>05-Aug-15 Empowered &amp; motivated self-learning adults are the
only way to true engagement with a modern learning agenda
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Empowered and motivated adults are engaged
learners</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>14-Aug-15 Tech can support learning evolution but it’s only a
tool not the full answer. No tech budget? There are other ways
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Neither evolution nor revolution have to have
tech</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>12-Oct-15 Changing mindsets to learning is every day is all part
of modern learning agenda. Practise what you preach #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Build a ‘learning is every day’ mindset</strong></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
</figure>

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (12.4)" class="box" id="_16_CHAPTER_C12_sec_006" role="complementary">

<figure id="_16_CHAPTER_C12_UFigure_12_6" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF006.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   What are your organisation's burning platforms?

-   What is your company history of L&D?

-   []{#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml_page_291 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 291"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}What is the context that L&D is operating
    within?

-   What are the external factors affecting your organisation?

-   What does a people-focused approach look like in your context? Can
    you invite the whole person into a better learning experience?

-   How do you listen to your organisational stories? What are they
    telling you?

-   What can you look at from a different angle? What does that throw
    up?

-   Where are the majority of your colleagues on the technology adoption
    curve? How will that affect your evolution or revolution?

-   What was your organisation's Covid-19 response? How has that changed
    your L&D?

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (12.5)" class="box" id="_15_CHAPTER_C12_sec_007" role="complementary">

<figure id="_15_CHAPTER_C12_UFigure_12_7" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF007.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Be confident in knowing your organisation well and where L&D sits
    within it.

-   Understand your history.

-   Listen carefully to your organisational stories.

-   Identify your approach to your L&D strategy.

-   Build a business case and campaign around your approach, be that
    evolution or revolution.

-   Take a people-centred approach to L&D.

-   Gain stakeholder advocacy to support your direction.

-   Progression is moving forward at the pace your organisation
    requires. Be comfortable with that pace.

-   Consider making better use of your Apprenticeship Levy (if
    applicable).

-   Be ready to change direction quickly, if needs must.

</aside>

::: {#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml__16_CHAPTER_C12_sec_008 .section .references .bibliography aria-label="THE LIBRARY LIST (12.6)" role="doc-bibliography"}
<figure id="_16_CHAPTER_C12_UFigure_12_8" class="figure">
<p><span id="16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml_page_292" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 292" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF008.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Gray, P (2008) A Brief History of Education, *Psychology Today*
    \[online\]
    [[www.psychologytoday.com/gb/blog/freedom-learn/200808/brief-history-education]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.psychologytoday.com/gb/blog/freedom-learn/200808/brief-history-education)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/BM6F-GQWG]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/BM6F-GQWG))

-   Moules, J (2019) UK apprenticeship levy's low take-up highlighted by
    survey, *Financial Times* \[online\]
    [[www.ft.com/content/7c33c360-1779-11ea-9ee4-11f260415385]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.ft.com/content/7c33c360-1779-11ea-9ee4-11f260415385)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/H3AY-9LSH]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/H3AY-9LSH))

-   Senge, P M (2006) *The Fifth Discipline: The art and practice of the
    learning organization*, 2^nd^ edition, Random House Business, London

-   Sinek, S (2009) How great leaders inspire action, *TED Talks*
    \[online\]
    [[www.ted.com/talks/simon_sinek_how_great_leaders_inspire_action]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.ted.com/talks/simon_sinek_how_great_leaders_inspire_action)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/7YC7-S26U]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/7YC7-S26U))

-   Sinek, S (2011) *Start With Why*, Penguin, London

-   Stern, J (2018) What no one tells you about Bloom's taxonomy, *Share
    My Lesson* \[online\]
    [[www.sharemylesson.com/blog/what-no-one-tells-you-about-blooms-taxonomy]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.sharemylesson.com/blog/what-no-one-tells-you-about-blooms-taxonomy)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/T3ZN-LH9B]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/T3ZN-LH9B))

-   Stodd, J (2015) An Introduction to Scaffolded Social Learning,
    *julianstodd.wordpress.com* \[online\]
    [[www.julianstodd.wordpress.com/2015/10/30/an-introduction-to-scaffolded-social-learning/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.julianstodd.wordpress.com/2015/10/30/an-introduction-to-scaffolded-social-learning/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/5QXM-EWAD]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/5QXM-EWAD))

-   Timms, P (2018) *Transformational HR*, Kogan Page, London

-   Timms, P (2020) *The Energized Workplace*, Kogan Page, London

-   Wheeler, S (2014a) Learning Theories: Jerome Bruner On The
    Scaffolding Of Learning, *Teach Thought* \[online\]
    [[www.teachthought.com/learning/learning-theories-jerome-bruner-scaffolding-learning/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.teachthought.com/learning/learning-theories-jerome-bruner-scaffolding-learning/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/8YKY-NPVS]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/8YKY-NPVS))

-   Wheeler, S (2014b) Reaching Further, *steve-wheeler.co.uk*
    \[online\]
    [[www.steve-wheeler.co.uk/2014/05/reaching-further.html]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.steve-wheeler.co.uk/2014/05/reaching-further.html)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/XAQ4-Z52Y]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/XAQ4-Z52Y))

-   Wheeler, S (2019) *Digital Learning in Organizations*, Kogan Page,
    London

-   Willcox, P (n.d.) Podcasts, *Emotion at Work* \[online\]
    [[www.emotionatwork.co.uk/podcast/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.emotionatwork.co.uk/podcast/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/DBQ2-LW4Q]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/DBQ2-LW4Q))
:::

::: {#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml__16_CHAPTER_C12_sec_009 .section .endnotes aria-labelledby="_16_CHAPTER_C12_h1_009"}
# Notes {#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml__16_CHAPTER_C12_h1_009 .title}

[1](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml__16_CHAPTER_C12_Endnote_12_1_reference) The
Kubler-Ross Change Curve is useful for this:
[[www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newPPM_96.htm]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newPPM_96.htm)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/SJT5-XJ89]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/SJT5-XJ89))

[2](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml__16_CHAPTER_C12_Endnote_12_2_reference) For an
explanation of the technology adoption curve, see
[[www.fourweekmba.com/technology-adoption-curve/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.fourweekmba.com/technology-adoption-curve/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/4WXJ-QF88]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/4WXJ-QF88))
:::

[]{#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

<div>

[]{#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml_page_293 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 293"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[[13]{.ordinal
.ordinal}](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_17_CHAPTER_C13_sec_001)

# [Reflective Practice](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_17_CHAPTER_C13_sec_001) {#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_h1_001 .title}

The value of reflection and how to build it into your learning strategy.

</div>

<figure id="_17_CHAPTER_C13_UFigure_13_1" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF001.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

Any L&D strategy needs to make sure that people have the opportunity to
take theoretical knowledge (i.e. things people learn, be that on a
course, via a resource, in a social learning setting, etc.) and turn it
into reality in a work situation. There is no purpose to workplace
learning if the application of learning is not possible. In my
experience, one reason for learning failing to translate into
application at work is that we expect our learners to make the leap from
theoretical knowledge to applied knowledge by themselves. The frameworks
in this book are methods I have used to help people make that leap less
daunting. By making it easy for people to see that learning *is* the
work, we can morph the learning and work.

A way to consciously surface learning in practice is through reflection.
Instead of taking a day out of the office to return to work as though
nothing happened, a learning culture can be built in a conscious and
purposeful way by embedding continuous learning activity alongside the
work and with regular reflection. Of all the gifts L&D can give to a
learner, I believe it is the skill and habit of reflective practice
which is the kindest of all. The value of noticing what you have
achieved, or what has or hasn't worked, or what needs to change, is the
gift of self-awareness, conscious practice, and the direction of your
next steps all rolled into one.

L&Ders must always build reflective practice into all of their learning
because this is where the actual benefit takes place. We need to include
[]{#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml_page_294 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 294"
role="doc-pagebreak"}reflective practice in both our personal L&D
activities and also for learners in an organisation. Reflecting enables
learners to synthesise learning to the context they are working in and
apply it in a way that is relevant and useful to them. That is when the
learning is consolidated.

We can start the reflective practice within our work by giving people
scenarios to work through. What would you do in this scenario? Would you
do this or that? We can give people real case studies to work through
with a pause and reflect on what their response would be in a given
situation. The great thing with real case studies is that, after the
pause, you can share the end outcomes of the story with people so they
can check their ideas against reality. This makes the learning much more
powerful and more complete, especially as not all case studies are
success stories. We can learn from others' mistakes rather than make our
own, and, of course, consider the decisions we might have made. We can
also offer real-life simulated work environments, where people can feel
the learning, as often it's not until they've actually thought about it
in their own context that they will really see any impact.

Take a very basic example: the office telephone system. You could tell
someone how to use the telephone, you could show them how to use it, you
could give them instructions on how to use it, or they could actually
just use it themselves. These are all valid learning practices which, in
this sequence, make for basic scaffolded learning. Yet, without thinking
about it, by practising using it, perhaps failing to get it to operate,
trying it again and learning from these mistakes, will someone actually
know how to properly operate the phone and become proficient? That's not
just how we learn; that's how we ensure learning sticks. This is why
building in the opportunity to reflect is such an important part of the
learning solutions we develop. Practice, in my opinion, is a form of
reflection -- it is 'reflective practice' for a reason.

Stakeholders must accept that reflective practice is a fundamental part
of learning. It's pointless sending someone off on a face-to-face course
or getting them to complete an e-learning module if they're back to
business as usual as soon as they return to their desk. When this
happens, the learner is highly likely to lose whatever they might have
gleaned in their session. That's why you have to build in time for
people to think about what they've been doing, think about what they've
been learning, and how it relates to them and their work. It can be
something as simple as factoring in an hour of dedicated time to think
about the learning post-event, or, better still, build in reflective
practice every week. That hour can be spent at the person's desk or
[]{#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml_page_295 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 295"
role="doc-pagebreak"}away from it, alone or in a group, reflecting on
formal or informal learning -- whichever will produce the best results.
This is a time for thinking over what went well, what they gained, and
what else they need to learn. It is critical, indeed, crucial to enable
such time as part of the learning process.

<figure id="_17_CHAPTER_C13_UFigure_13_2" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF002.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

[L&Ders must be reflective
practitioners](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_17_CHAPTER_C13_h3_001)

When it comes to reflective practice, all eyes are on us. We must be the
trendsetters, walking the talk and showcasing the value of learning not
being a one-off event. We need to build up a culture of reflective
practice within our own continuous professional development, and then in
our organisations, so we can showcase reflective practice techniques.
You can start small, such as reading this book and talking to others
about it. Then think what you can do next. How will you take reading
this book further? You could share it with other L&Ders, put out a blog
on social media, action some of what you've read. There are all sorts of
things you could do to stretch your thinking and practice. The important
thing is not to just read a book then move on to the next thing. Take
time to reflect on and process what you've learned. Try something out
and see what happens. You can build up your knowledge of reflective
practice by curiosity about how others recommend you do reflective
practice. It's really important to model the behaviour you want to see
in others.

My colleague at CIPD, David Hayden, can often be found talking about
learning about learning. When it comes to being a better L&D
practitioner, there is no doubt that learning about learning is of
immense value. I recommend reflecting on the work of Harold Jarche and
Jane Hart, together with the many learning philosophies and theories in
a quest to take your learning practice up the competence scale. Learning
how to learn is all part of this practice. It is quite meta to learn
about how to learn. However, it is great prep for making your learning
offer meta too; immersing yourself in the thing you are learning about,
by immersing yourself in the thing you are learning. It is my favourite
way to learn anything -- certainly how I learnt to write a book!

[]{#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml_page_296 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 296"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[Solo reflective
practice](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_17_CHAPTER_C13_h3_002)

Reflective practice is more than simply just filling in a questionnaire
at the end of any training. It is important that people become
reflective prac­titioners, no matter what work they do. Building a
culture that encourages people to independently and naturally reflect on
what they do is crucial. Encourage solo reflective practice to come
naturally by adding 'lessons learnt' meetings at the end of projects, or
adding a weekly roundup of what you have learnt from interactions with
customers, or by keeping a log of impactful conversations and what they
taught us. We've already seen in [Chapter 11](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml) how
we can use the acronyms WWW (What went well?), EBI (Even better if?) and
WIN (What is next?) to help people to think over what they've
experienced and why. These work for anything, not just formal learning,
but also the informal learning that happens throughout the day, every
day. From a chat with a colleague where we've walked away and thought to
ourselves 'that didn't quite go to plan' and pondered our next steps, to
a customer complaint where we want to make a plan to ensure it doesn't
happen again. Reflective practice in action is absolutely what these
acronyms encourage.

[Group
reflection](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_17_CHAPTER_C13_h3_003)

There is also a lot to be gained from group reflection. L&D teams can
facilitate groups of people to reflect together. The most important and
probably the best-known group reflection tool is communities of
practice, as discussed in [Chapter 6](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml). The
regular and formal spaces created by a community of practice keeps
people real in their reflection. They have to think about their learning
and practice to keep up with the group. This latent peer pressure is a
by-product, and certainly not a primary driver of a community of
practice, which is not designed to put people under pressure. However,
gently leaning on people can be helpful to hold them accountable.
Professional pride can be a big motivator.

As an L&Der, you can get into the habit of using collective reflections
in a variety of ways. Online social platforms such as Twitter can be
particularly useful. You could get involved in Twitter chats such as
#LDinsight or #HRHour. A Twitter chat works by a host posting a question
and hashtag and people replying and chatting, also including the
hashtag. This makes it easy to see the overall conversation and connect
with each other.

[]{#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml_page_297 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 297"
role="doc-pagebreak"}If you prefer in-person group reflection, you could
try attending con­ference fringe events such as Barcamp, hosted by Martin
Couzins (@martincouzins), which he runs after the Learning Technologies
conference, or Emerald Works' live podcast (#TheGPPodcast) recording,
which they host after the CIPD's Festival of Work. The weekly Good
Practice podcast from Emerald Works is one of many industry podcasts
that offer food for
thought[]{#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_1_reference
.anchor}^[1](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_1)^. As a
different take on group reflection, they are great for the commute or a
dog walk to reflect upon other people's ideas on a topic.

Another option for group reflection is to join one of the many free
industry webinars such as the Learning & Skills Group's #LSGWebinars, or
the Lightbulb Moment Community from Jo Cook (@LightbulbJo). All these
opportunities offer you the chance to meet fellow L&Ders to think and
reflect on L&D topics and issues in real life or online.

[Personal learning
networks](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_17_CHAPTER_C13_h3_004)

Personal learning networks (PLNs) are another option for reflective
practice. As discussed in [Chapter 1](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml), a PLN
works on a number of levels -- the can be people you know well
personally, people in your face-to-face network, people you follow on
social media, people you admire and respect, people whose work
influences you and people whose work challenges you. I also encourage a
PLN to welcome people whose work is different to yours so that you
broaden out your perspective and your thinking. Having a personal
learning network that is just an echo chamber of like-minded thinkers is
no good to anyone. It's really useful to have people in your network
that you know will boost your learning, who you can learn from and with,
who will challenge you, give you fresh ideas and thinking.

To reflect with a PLN, you need to share your thoughts and ideas. This
could be via blog, vlog, podcast, broadcasts, conferences, Twitter,
LinkedIn, and more. In sharing, the social contract draws on acceptable
norms which suggest that by sharing publicly, you are open for inviting
critique. If you wish to take a more private stance, you may prefer a
more local support network, which can, of course, overlap with your PLN,
or a mentor.

[Support
networks](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_17_CHAPTER_C13_h3_005)

Support networks are invaluable, both professionally and personally.
They can come in the form of trusted peers, managers, people that you
used to work with but don't any more, mentors, coaches or counsellors,
family or []{#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml_page_298 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 298" role="doc-pagebreak"}friends. They are much closer
to the whole-you than a PLN might be, so you may feel more confident in
sharing things with them. They are the people that bring you hope, can
challenge you, and help you focus and prioritse what you need to reflect
on.

In a business context, your support network generally is your team, your
line manager, and you may also have other trusted colleagues and peers,
for example, your HR business partner. Support networks are needed in
the workplace. They are your sense checker, ideas supporter, and
motivator. You need to have an honest, mutually respectful relationship
so that they can call you out when they need to. You don't need to be
best friends to have a great professional and supportive relationship.
You need to have a sufficiently transparent relationship in order to
bring your whole self to work. Think about your trusted network at work.
Who is on your cheer squad? Who can give you honest advice? Who is there
to support your failures and celebrate your successes? A regular
strategic latte with these people is critical (see [Chapter
3](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml)).

[What did you learn this
week?](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_17_CHAPTER_C13_h3_006)

Whether you are a line manager or a member of a team, there are certain
techniques you can use to help build trusted relationships and a trusted
peer support network within your organisation. One of those techniques
is 'What did you learn this week?' (WDYLTW). This is a really great tool
to add to team meetings or supportive chats or mentoring conversations.
It is especially important if you work in L&D. If any group of people
should be demonstrating how we are learning all the time and reflecting
on that learning all the time, it's us. We should also be thinking about
how we can support others in their reflections and how they can support
us. By asking that simple question, 'What did you learn this week?', you
are building reflective practice into everyday work. You can adapt the
question; to what did you learn from that customer/from that
project/from that situation? Making a 'lessons learnt' discussion a
normal part of any project debrief can have a similar impact.

Doing this enables us to get influence and generate conversation around
our learning, whilst doing the same for other people at the same time.
It has a ripple effect. Charles Jennings and I once had a conversation
about his expectation for line managers and the idea of 505. This is
where a manager takes five minutes before any learning intervention to
talk to their staff member: What are you planning to learn? What are
your expectations? []{#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml_page_299 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 299" role="doc-pagebreak"}What do you hope to get out
of the learning? During the learning activity, the manager has no role
(the zero in 505). Then, after the learning, the manager again spends
five minutes chatting to the learner: What have you got out of the
experience? How are you going to apply it in your everyday life at work?
This is a very simple technique to enable people to have good, useful
conversations with their managers. Taking 10 minutes to help people to
reflect before and after learning so as to gain maximum value from it is
an easy way for L&D to encourage managers to be more involved in
learning.

[Making notes](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_17_CHAPTER_C13_h3_007)

Whether we take on solo or group reflective practice, writing our
reflections down rather than just pondering makes the action elements of
reflection more clear and, hopefully, more likely to be acted upon. At
live events, live tweeting, creating topic threads and photo stories on
what is discussed, and your thoughts about it, are also valuable, and
the event hashtag can be used to review and reflect. Snapchat
stories[]{#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_2_reference
.anchor}^[2](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_2)^ might
also be used for live reflective practice from conferences and events: I
have used Instagram to capture images alongside a micro-blog of what is
happening and my reflections in the moment.

Journaling, the act of regularly writing down your thoughts,
observations, experiences, and reflections in a notebook, can also be
useful. The trick is the regularity, to form a habit of doing this. You
can use any notebook, paper or digital, but recording all in one place
can help with habit forming. Keeping a journal reminds us to celebrate
progress and accomplishments. One that I have enjoyed using is
#3GoodThings, which I heard of through L&Der and positive psychologist
Sukhvinder
Pabial[]{#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_3_reference
.anchor}^[3](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_3)^.
Adding images and drawings to your notes
(sketchnoting)[]{#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_4_reference
.anchor}^[4](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_4)^ might
also be useful if you find visual cues help to consolidate reflection.

Be it written, journaled, drawn, videoed, or photographed, recording
your thoughts and responses at the time is a great way to later engage
in reflective practice. These assets can be referred to later by you, or
curated to encourage others to reflect about an event. If learners are
undertaking a long, formal qualification-type course, or if they are new
to leadership, for example, writing down ideas, thoughts, reflections
and experiences about what went well and why, what went less well and
why, is really useful. The act of writing and reflecting at the time is
good, and you also have the journal/images/film/photos to look back over
and reflect over at a later point.

[]{#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml_page_300 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 300"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[Wild
writing](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_17_CHAPTER_C13_h3_008)

If someone is struggling with something, they often find that the very
act of writing about it helps to clarify the situation and see them
through to potential solutions. If people need to get things out of
their head, or don't want or like the discipline of regular journaling,
I recommend encouraging wild writing instead. Wild writing was first
introduced to me by the organisational consultant Julie Drybrough. In
her blog in 2016, Julie describes wild writing as a process
'*...*attributed to Natalie Goldberg, by which you write, free-form,
without edit, censure or pause for a period of time'. It is essentially
taking a pen and a blank piece of paper and writing without punctuation,
without hesitation, without worrying about spelling or grammar or any of
the other things that normally hold you back. You don't even need to
worry about whether it makes sense or not. You just need to get the
words down as they flow out of you and you write until you have nothing
left to write. I've done it, and it's an incredibly cathartic and
productive experience. It enables you to work through your subconscious,
bringing stuff to your conscious self that you can then reflect on. What
do you do with it once you've written it? That's up to you. You can keep
it, re-read it, punctuate it and make sense of it if you want to. Or you
can throw it away. The most important part is the act of reflecting, so
this practice can be particularly effective in a solo capacity as it is
something you cannot get wrong.

[Feedback](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_17_CHAPTER_C13_h3_009)

Seeking and receiving feedback is another useful opportunity in the
reflective practice space, as long as reflection on what is discussed
takes place. Some may find it difficult to ask for and receive feedback
in fear of what they might hear, particularly in relation to their work,
so it's crucial to build a culture where people can not only feel
comfortable in the act of asking, but accept that sometimes the feedback
will be challenging to reflect on. Inviting honest feedback is a big,
difficult step for many people, but it is also an important step. We can
never really know ourselves as others know us. By hearing what other
people have to say, whether it's positive feedback or negative, people
normally grow in some way. It is all about balance, focusing on helpful
growth, not focusing on one bad thing one person said. I would recommend
objective feedback over subjective feedback, so evidence-based feedback
is especially useful. There are a variety of different tools you can
use[]{#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_5_reference
.anchor}^[5](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_5)^:

-   []{#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml_page_301 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 301"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}SBI model -- situational, behaviours and
    impact;[]{#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_6_reference
    .anchor}^[6](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_6)^

-   IDEA model -- identify, describe, encourage, action;

-   CEDAR model -- context, examples, diagnosis, action, review;

-   EECC model -- example, effect, change,
    continue.[]{#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_7_reference
    .anchor}^[7](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_7)^

Rather than exposing somebody's emotions, these models help to take the
subjective element out of a discussion to enable people to consider
things from a different perspective. These feedback models are all
evidence-based on what people have observed or what people have
experienced, rather than how anybody felt initially. This builds
psychological safety, which is crucial in feedback settings.

[The Thinking
Environment](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_17_CHAPTER_C13_h3_010)

There is another really useful reflective activity for people to try and
this one involves one other person. Nancy Kline pioneered the Thinking
Environment, which is based on the concept of helping other people to
think. There are two observations at the heart of her work. First, 'The
quality of everything we do depends on the quality of the thinking we do
first' (Kline, 2020), and, second, 'What does it take for people to help
each other to think well for themselves?' (Wilson, 2017).

Most of the time, we talk to people in two-way conversation mode. In
this mode, we don't always give sufficient attention to what the other
person is saying because we are also thinking about what we will say in
our response. With the Thinking Environment, you truly listen to
somebody and hold the space for them to do the
thinking[]{#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_8_reference
.anchor}^[8](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_8)^. You
don't interrupt or suggest things or interpret for someone what they are
saying. You listen and allow them to talk, and the results can be very
interesting. As a reflective practice technique, this is really
empowering for people. This is not a solo activity, although in one
sense it is, as one person is doing pretty much all of the talking.
However, having someone to hold space and encourage you to think means
it is easier to reflect on your thinking and offers a person to
verbalise to. It is a powerful and enlightening methodology.

[Taking action on
reflection](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_17_CHAPTER_C13_h3_011)

Though there are many ways to consider and approach reflective practice,
one thing always stands out above everything else: all learning is
theoretical []{#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml_page_302 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 302" role="doc-pagebreak"}until people do something
with it. It is theoretical until the learning lands fully in the context
of the learner and brings about any necessary behaviour change.
Ultimately, all learning needs to lead towards behaviour change, and one
of the really good things about reflective practice is that it helps
push us from our unconscious to our conscious thought. When something is
in our conscious space, we can make a conscious decision to do things
differently. And the irony is that by consciously thinking about what
we've learned and then doing it, we actually push it all back into our
unconscious, enabling the behaviour to become habitual. If this sounds a
bit intangible, think about what happens when we learn how to ride a
bicycle or touch type. Once we have grasped the mechanics and skills of
what needs to be done to be a competent cyclist or typist, we do it
without thinking about it. We have gained a level of unconscious
competence, as the classic model shown in [Figure
13.1](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Figure_13_1) reminds us.

<figure id="_17_CHAPTER_C13_Figure_13_1" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M17NF001.png"
alt="The figure shows a stairstep process." /></p>
<details id="_17_CHAPTER_C13_Figure_13_1-details">
<summary>
Figure 13.1 details
</summary>
<p>There are 4 steps, each with an action that leads to the next higher
step as follows: The bottom step is labeled unconscious incompetence and
the action awareness. The next step labeled conscious incompetence
results from learning. The next step labeled conscious competence
results from change. The top step labeled unconscious competence results
from mastery.</p>
</details>
<p>SOURCE Unknown</p>
<figcaption><p><a
href="#00_PRELIMS_s11_LOI.xhtml#loi_17_CHAPTER_C13_Figure_13_1"><span
class="label">Figure</span> <span
class="ordinal">13.1</span> Unconscious to conscious
competence</a></p></figcaption>
</figure>

The building blocks of a learning culture can come from moving things
into a conscious space. The case study that we have for this particular
chapter will really support this thinking, so let's move on to that now.

<aside aria-label="Case-Study (13.1)" class="case-study" epub:type="case-study" id="_17_CHAPTER_C13_sec_002" role="complementary">

<figure id="_17_CHAPTER_C13_UFigure_12_3" class="figure">
<p><span id="17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml_page_303" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 303" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF003.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

Michelle Coates, Learning & Development Manager at World Vision UK and
the Charity Learning Consortium's Learning Professional of the Year
2019, has had great success both in reflecting on her own practice, but
also building reflection into her induction programme. It starts with
the mission statement, 'You are here! We are so pleased! We will now
work with you so that you know what you need to know, when you need to
know it, and are able to be the best you as soon as possible so that
together we can achieve our mission here at WVUK.'

Michelle and I share more than our name. We particularly share a love of
doing good work with little budget. Michelle is the epitome of why I say
a little budget forces a creativity that big budgets stifle. Her
achievements at World Vision UK are steady, understated, effective, and
demonstrative of why she was awarded Learning Professional of the Year.
This first couple of paragraphs from the Charity Learning Consortium's
write-up of Michelle's award win summarises her challenge:

> Induction was frankly counterproductive at World Vision UK. Your first
> day was spent in the classroom with a whole host of people talking to
> you, including hours of advice and endless policies and practices.
> This goes against everything that L&D practitioners know about how we
> learn and was information overload. Meanwhile, because new starters
> hadn't been through GDPR or Health & Safety training they couldn't
> access IT systems, had to fill in lots of forms in duplicate and had
> no security card -- which they needed to access the loo!

If this sounds depressingly familiar, then Michelle Coates' approach to
changing this, with virtually no budget at all, is not.

In true reflective practice style, Michelle likes to experience
something and think about it afterwards. Once an avid note-taker, these
days she prefers to be more present in the moment and reflect later
through photos of events she takes, or gain inspiration from the social
media record of the event. In a chapter about reflection, she is the
perfect guest writer to share her story.

**WORLD VISION -- REFLECTIVE PRACTICE**

**by Michelle Coates**

To get a momentum for change around improving our onboarding experience,
I surveyed staff who had started through the old induction process over
the previous []{#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml_page_304 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 304" role="doc-pagebreak"}year. One of World Vision's
Core Values is that 'We Value People'. We asked in the survey if they
felt 'valued and welcomed into the organisation?' More than 50 per cent
said 'No', which confirmed we had a massive shift to make.

I put a small team of stakeholders together and when we discussed why
'we' wanted to change it, we realised that we had many celebrations for
people's leaving dos but did not celebrate staff arriving.

I was new to the role of Learning & Development Manager; although I'd
completed my Level 3 CIPD in L&D practice years ago, I hadn't really had
chance to put much into practice. This was my first opportunity to
gather and use all the 'nuggets' I'd stored away in that 'ooh, that's
interesting' box.

To keep my learning up to date, after the CIPD course I attended
networking events in my local area. I went to several annual exhibitions
with free talks; I do not pay for any conferences as I find free
learning is out there! I attended CIPD's Leaders in Learning networks
and Charity Learning Consortium quarterly meetings.

I also used the opportunity to have a mentor in the industry. As a
newbie myself, I just needed that external voice telling me I was on the
right track and that I wasn't making stuff up. The reassurance and
challenge from this have been extremely helpful.

Finally, within the World Vision Partnership, there are resources to
draw on; there are L&D people in different offices, and I am part of
their network too. In all these opportunities, I get to meet other L&D
professionals and hear about best practice and how they approach things.
These chances to connect are invaluable, especially when you are a
single function role with a small budget and you're still expected to
deliver the full works.

Now, I have to say that networking generally was extremely out of my
comfort zone. Networking, as a quiet person, who was also feeling like I
had a luminescent neon sign above my head saying 'consciously
incompetent', was terrifying. The first few I went to, I came out
feeling inadequate and upset. So, if you're also a bit wallflower-like,
take heart. It gets easier each time you go. I persevered with them for
my own personal growth, but also because the 'what' I had learned was
useful and practical.

I took notes in a handbag-sized book. Originally, I furiously wrote
everything anyone uttered and filled many books. And although I loved
choosing a notebook each time, this wasn't the best way for me to learn,
partly as I wasn't as present in the room, and it took a lot longer to
go through and find things afterwards. I also wasn't as discerning about
what was useful for my context, as I was just eager to fill my brain and
my notebook with stuff.

Now what I do is add or follow the presenters to LinkedIn or Twitter, as
often they'd post a summary of what they covered. I take pictures of
particular flipcharts/slides using Office Lens (as it syncs to my One
Drive at work). This now leaves me to note down the 'nuggets', the light
bulb moments that I just know will work in
[]{#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml_page_305 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 305"
role="doc-pagebreak"}my organisation. Doing it this way allows for
easier reference, reflection and application.

So, what were these nuggets, and how did I use them for my onboarding
improvements?

-   **The 'No Plasters' approach** that Michelle Parry-Slater delivered
    in a talk at a CIPD Leaders in Learning event. In essence, it was
    not to stick a plaster on something to make it work. Rather, fix the
    fundamental issues. Keep things simple and don't overcomplicate.
    Pilot things in a small way, tweak as you go along. Don't wait for
    the perfectly designed programme or 'things'. It stuck because I
    thought, this is why we don't get stuff landed or out of the door,
    as we're waiting for everything to be finished to perfection. So
    stop it, and if it's good enough, put it out there. I applied this
    to new starter information. We took the videos on our phone, using
    an app to edit, and could put them out the same day. We also
    trialled different elements as and when they were ready, rather than
    waiting for completion of the improvement.

-   **Ask the customer!** Mentioned at different events. So simple but
    so often overlooked. What did new starters think would be a
    meaningful induction period? We asked hiring managers and new
    starters what they wished they had known in the journey, at
    different stages. This led to the information and delivery methods
    we were going to use throughout the induction period.

-   **The Kaizen philosophy**, using Lean Six Sigma. The World Vision
    Partnership was encouraging a mindset of continuous improvement and
    resources to help you do this. We used tools like mapping the
    current process and all the stakeholders, using creative
    problem-solving tools like SCAMPER, the 5 WHYs and Value Analysis to
    see what percentage of the process actually added value. Finally, we
    imagined a future state and mapped the 'new process', documenting
    and creating actions about how we were going to get there.

-   **Blended learning**. This cropped up in my course and was part of
    most people's talks, although it still wasn't being applied in our
    context. We took the 70:20:10 and Kolb's cycle and used this
    framework to ensure the 'knowledge' elements of the induction were
    blended. We have e-learning, some face-to-face, new paper/electronic
    guides, emails at different junctures, videos and even a little VR.

With all these 'nuggets' I'd picked up, it really transformed the why,
what, who, when and how of the approach we were taking. We were
successful. How did we know? We asked the customer!

We couldn't have achieved the impact we did without all the learning,
then knowing how to get the best from those opportunities, the
reflection, and the commitment and willingness to apply the nuggets.

</aside>

<figure id="_17_CHAPTER_C13_UFigure_12_4" class="figure">
<p><span id="17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml_page_306" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 306" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF004.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_17_CHAPTER_C13_UFigure_13_9" class="figure"
aria-describedby="_17_CHAPTER_C13_UFigure_13_9_details">
<p><img src="content/images/M17UF001.png"
alt="The figure shows 4 clusters of factors." /></p>
<details id="_17_CHAPTER_C13_UFigure_13_9_details">
<summary>
Figure details
</summary>
<p>The factors are as follows:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Mindset: curious, open, and willing to seek feedback, forward
focused</p></li>
<li><p>Skillset: reflecting thinking and skills, mindfulness, clear
thinking, self-care</p></li>
<li><p>Toolset: reflective practice questions and tools, including W W
W, E B I, W I N, E E C C, W D Y L T W, thinking environment, journaling,
sketchnoting</p></li>
<li><p>Dataset: learning culture data, personal notes and
journaling</p></li>
</ul>
</details>
</figure>

<aside aria-label="Tip (13.2)" class="tip" id="_17_CHAPTER_C13_sec_004" role="complementary">

<figure id="_17_CHAPTER_C13_UFigure_12_5" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF005.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_17_CHAPTER_C13_UTable_13_1" class="table">
<p><a href="#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_sec_005">Skip
table</a></p>
<div class="table" role="table" tabindex="0">
<table class="left">
<thead>
<tr>
<th scope="col"><p>Tweet</p></th>
<th scope="col"><p>Tips checklist</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><p>10-Mar-15 Been on a course? Make time to reflect, contextualise
and discuss the learning. Use it or lose it! #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Reflection helps learning make sense</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>02-Apr-15 Understand value of downtime. Space for reflection can
help embed learning &amp; give perspective #EasterBreak
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Space for reflection IS part of
learning</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p><span id="17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml_page_307" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 307" role="doc-pagebreak"></span> 29-Apr-15 Seek
feedback always. People will feel more involved in your projects &amp;
so more supportive #NoPlasters #FeedbackCarnival</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Seek feedback and act on it</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>29-Jun-15 Learn, Reflect, Relearn. Repeat. This is a sound
foundation for any modern learning environment #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Reflection is essential to all learning</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>16-Jul-15 Encourage teams to meet outside or walk whilst meeting
for a new perspective on issues and learning #oxygen
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Walking aids reflection</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>24-Aug-15 This week’s #NoPlasters will be brought to you by
special guests @KathChapman &amp; @donnyboy71 who have stepped in to
share whilst I’m away #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Reflect with other people, particularly your
PLN</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>05-Nov-15 Apologies for missing #NoPlasters yesterday. I was at
#CIPD15 &amp; @Street_Wisdom. Learnt lots, had great chats, reminded me
time out is good.</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Time out with others can be just the reset you
need</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>05-Nov-15 In times of change ensure reflection time is built in.
Go for a walk, be inspired by your surroundings, think
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Reflection must be built in, not added
on</strong></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
</figure>

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (13.3)" class="box" id="_17_CHAPTER_C13_sec_005" role="complementary">

<figure id="_17_CHAPTER_C13_UFigure_13_6" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF006.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   How does reflective practice play out in your organisation?

-   How can you improve reflective practice personally, and for your
    organisation?

-   What other ways can you think of to carry out some reflective
    practice?

-   How can you take action on your reflections? How can others in your
    organisation?

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (13.4)" class="box" id="_16_CHAPTER_C13_sec_006" role="complementary">

<figure id="_16_CHAPTER_C13_UFigure_13_7" class="figure">
<p><span id="17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml_page_308" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 308" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF007.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Ensure your learning strategy values all the benefits found in
    effective reflective practice.

-   Be a reflective practitioner and make it known you are willing to
    influence others.

-   Build reflective practice into all levels of your learning
    programmes.

-   Consider how you can encourage solo reflective practice activities.

-   Consider how you can facilitate group reflective practice
    activities.

-   Add WDYLTW to all team meeting agendas as a standard.

</aside>

::: {#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_sec_007 .section .references .bibliography aria-label="THE LIBRARY LIST (13.5)" role="doc-bibliography"}
<figure id="_17_CHAPTER_C13_UFigure_13_8" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF008.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Beevers, K, Rea, A and Hayden, D (2019) *Learning and development
    practice in the workplace*, 4th edition, Kogan Page, London

-   Business Balls (n.d.) Conscious Competence Learning Model,
    *businessballs.com* \[online\]
    [[www.businessballs.com/self-awareness/conscious-competence-learning-model/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.businessballs.com/self-awareness/conscious-competence-learning-model/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/MY9A-29U4]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/MY9A-29U4))

-   Coates, M (2019) Transforming induction at World Vision UK, *The
    Charity Learning Consortium* \[online\]
    [[www.charitylearning.org/2019/07/transforming-induction-at-world-vision-uk/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.charitylearning.org/2019/07/transforming-induction-at-world-vision-uk/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/P6FY-8M64]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/P6FY-8M64))

-   Drybrough, J (2016) Wild Mind Writing & Doing What I Do, *fuschia
    blue* \[online\]
    [[www.fuchsiablueblog.wordpress.com/2016/08/22/wild-mind-writing-doing-what-i-do/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.fuchsiablueblog.wordpress.com/2016/08/22/wild-mind-writing-doing-what-i-do/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/PEJ8-A7KN]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/PEJ8-A7KN))

-   Hart, J (2019*) Modern Workplace Learning*, Centre for Learning &
    Performance Technologies

-   Jarche, H (2011) Personal Knowledge Mastery, *jarche.com* \[online\]
    [[www.jarche.com/pkm/]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.jarche.com/pkm/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/Y3N9-E5EV]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/Y3N9-E5EV))

-   []{#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml_page_309 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 309"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}Jarche, H (2013) PKM in 24 pieces, *jarche.com*
    \[online\]
    [[www.jarche.com/2013/10/pkm-in-34-pieces/]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.jarche.com/2013/10/pkm-in-34-pieces/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/8RJU-29L6]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/8RJU-29L6))

-   Jarche, H (2014) Reflecting on reflection, *jarche.com* \[online\]
    [[www.jarche.com/2014/08/reflecting-on-reflection/]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.jarche.com/2014/08/reflecting-on-reflection/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/6G24-BG4C]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/6G24-BG4C))

-   Jarche, H (2014) The Seek, Sense and Share Framework, *jarche.com*
    \[online\]
    [[www.jarche.com/2014/02/the-seek-sense-share-framework/]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.jarche.com/2014/02/the-seek-sense-share-framework/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/ECD7-QRAV]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/ECD7-QRAV))

-   Kline, N (2015) *Time to Think: Listening to Ignite the Human Mind*,
    Octopus Books, London

-   Kline, N (2020) Thinking Environment, *Time to Think* \[online\]
    [[www.timetothink.com/thinking-environment/]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.timetothink.com/thinking-environment/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/3LEY-698B]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/3LEY-698B))

-   Mind Tools (n.d.) The Situation Behaviour Impact Feedback Tool:
    Providing Clear, Specific Feedback, *Mind Tools* \[online\]
    [[www.mindtools.com/pages/article/situation-behavior-impact-feedback.htm]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/situation-behavior-impact-feedback.htm)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/2576-5YHK]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/2576-5YHK))

-   Nemeth, B (2018) 3 Ways to Give Effective Feedback Every Time, *Mind
    Tools* \[online\]
    [[www.mindtools.com/pages/article/situation-behavior-impact-feedback.htm]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/situation-behavior-impact-feedback.htm)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/2576-5YHK]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/2576-5YHK))

-   Norman, B (2020) Award winning learning with no budget, *Training
    Zone* \[online\]
    [[www.trainingzone.co.uk/deliver/training/interview-award-winning-learning-with-no-budget]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.trainingzone.co.uk/deliver/training/interview-award-winning-learning-with-no-budget)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/26KP-7CYQ]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/26KP-7CYQ))

-   Training Industry (n.d.) The Ultimate L&D Podcast Guide, *Training
    Industry* \[online\]
    [[www.trainingindustry.com/the-ultimate-ld-podcast-guide/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.trainingindustry.com/the-ultimate-ld-podcast-guide/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/A6T7-27KK]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/A6T7-27KK))

-   Wilson, C (2017) Nancy Kline's Thinking Environment, *Coaching
    Culture at Work* \[online\]
    [[www.coachingcultureatwork.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/Advanced-Coaching-Skills-Nancy-Klines-Thinking-Environment.pdf]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.coachingcultureatwork.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/Advanced-Coaching-Skills-Nancy-Klines-Thinking-Environment.pdf)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/D9L3-SA7J]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/D9L3-SA7J))
:::

::: {#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_sec_008 .section .endnotes aria-labelledby="_17_CHAPTER_C13_h1_008"}
# Notes {#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_h1_008 .title}

[1](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_1_reference) Other
useful industry podcasts are Danny Seals' Mindchimp podcast:
[[www.mindchimp.podbean.com/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.mindchimp.podbean.com/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/8DMX-BRWM]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/8DMX-BRWM)),
David James' Learning & Development podcast:
[[www.omny.fm/shows/the-learning-development-podcast]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.omny.fm/shows/the-learning-development-podcast,),
the CIPD podcast:
[[www.cipd.co.uk/podcasts]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.cipd.co.uk/podcasts)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/8UKV-CSXX]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/8UKV-CSXX)),
Learning Now Radio:
[[www.learningnow.tv/listen]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.learningnow.tv/listen)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/KJG8-VWJZ]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/KJG8-VWJZ))
and Martin Couzins' and Nigel Paine's From Scratch:
[[www.fromscratchpodcast.com/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.fromscratchpodcast.com/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/Q2MF-V2ZY]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/Q2MF-V2ZY))

[]{#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml_page_310 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 310"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[2](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_2_reference)
Mike Shaw (@MikeShawLD) and Helen Blunden (@ActivateLearn) have used
Snapchat stories for live reflective practice from conferences and
events

[3](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_3_reference) Whilst
I heard this through Sukh (@SukhPabial), I understand there is a more
global movement:
[[www.the3goodthings.org/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.the3goodthings.org/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/6RYU-C2S4]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/6RYU-C2S4))

[4](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_4_reference) Tanmay
Vora (@TNVora) and Rachel Burnham (@BurnhamLandD) are great on
sketchnoting. Plus Simon Heath (@SimonHeath1) who is a consulting
artist, and Doug Shaw (@DougShaw1) who is an artist and consultant.

[5](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_5_reference) Three
of these models are listed here:
[[www.sessionlab.com/blog/effective-feedback-models/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.sessionlab.com/blog/effective-feedback-models/)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/FDQ7-F5HY]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/FDQ7-F5HY))
More are also listed here:
[[www.lucidchart.com/blog/performance-feedback-models]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.lucidchart.com/blog/performance-feedback-models)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/D82X-XZM2]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/D82X-XZM2))

[6](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_6_reference) The
Situation Behaviour Impact model is trademarked to the Center for
Creative Leadership:
[[www.ccl.org/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.ccl.org/) (archived at
[[https://perma.cc/JE3S-PFJA]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/JE3S-PFJA))
For more information about the model see
[[www.mindtools.com/pages/article/situation-behavior-impact-feedback.htm]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/situation-behavior-impact-feedback.htm)
(archived at
[[https://perma.cc/2576-5YHK]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/2576-5YHK))

[7](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_7_reference) I was
introduced to the EECC model doing some work for Edacy in Oman. I cannot
find a source.

[8](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml__17_CHAPTER_C13_Endnote_13_8_reference) I am
grateful to Meg Peppin (@OD_optimist) for introducing me to The Thinking
Environment.
:::

[]{#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

<div>

[]{#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml_page_311 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 311"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[[14]{.ordinal
.ordinal}](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_18_CHAPTER_C14_sec_001)

# [Hold it Lightly and Celebrate Success](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_18_CHAPTER_C14_sec_001) {#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml__18_CHAPTER_C14_h1_001 .title}

How to be resilient on your change journey when promoting a new learning
offer

</div>

<figure id="_18_CHAPTER_C14_UFigure_14_1" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF001.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

This book was hard for me to write. I found that although I had a lot to
say, I struggled to put it together coherently. I've reflected long and
hard on this, and it occurred to me I'm a learning practitioner, not a
writer. They are different skillsets. It's like taking a technically
brilliant employee and promoting them to line manager without any
support for the new skillset. This would be doomed to fail, as people
management is a technical expertise all of its own. Because you have
expertise in one area, doesn't mean you can turn your hand easily to
something else without learning. The author who has written a ton of
books doesn't necessarily give the best public presentations. The
teacher who is fantastic with the kids might struggle addressing adults.
The face-to-face trainer who wants to go digital might not know where to
start.

My advice? Just start somewhere. Recognise where you are on your journey
and identify where you want to go. Then draft in expert help. Seek the
stories of those who have gone before you. Find the tribe who's doing
what you want to be doing and hang with them. And, most importantly,
accept that along the way you will fail. Identifying failure, accepting
it, and learning from it is all part of the process. Try. Fail. Reflect.
You are not a failure unless you fail to try. Try a different way next
time. The biggest []{#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml_page_312 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 312" role="doc-pagebreak"}barriers to accomplishment
are without doubt self-limiting beliefs and a lack of ability to imagine
things done differently. Your success will come from endeavour.

In writing this book, I realised I do my best work with people, not
alone. I recognised my limitations and sought to overcome them. I went
out to my network. I looked for experts. I got help. If you don't know
where to start, that's ok. Just start with where you are. What are you
good at? What are you not so good at? Doing things we are bad at enables
us to get good at them, to master them.

The world of work is changing. We hear that phrase so often it is almost
meaningless. It has changed, and continues to change. Fast. Therein lies
some of the challenge of moving to new ways of thinking about workplace
L&D. As quick as you are moving towards new ideas, they are moving
further away. So hold it lightly. Don't pressure yourself to get it
right every time. In L&D, we are often the last to invest in ourselves,
and we are often the last to celebrate our successes. We must celebrate
successes, to keep perspective. In L&D, I think we are too quick to move
onto the next thing. We don't spend enough time evaluating and
celebrating what has been achieved. This chapter is called Hold it
Lightly and Celebrate Success because whatever you do in your work, some
people will like it and others will not. Your career is yours to own and
grow. Concentrating on your professional development, your
professionalism, your willingness to be curious, you will learn how to
be a better L&D practitioner.

Your learners, on the other hand, are responsible for themselves and
their career and their response to the learning you offer them. They
equally need to carry their own baggage. Provided you have done your job
well, you cannot control the reasons why they cannot focus on their
learning.

The ability to bounce back after setbacks, after things don't go quite
as planned, is crucial if you are going to lead change in L&D. You may
not win the business case to get the learning platform of your dreams.
An activity in a virtual live classroom could be unsuccessful. People
might not turn up to your session because work is more important. All of
these are learning opportunities for L&Ders. Take it as such; don't take
it personally. We are more resilient if we approach everything we do as
a chance to learn and be better prepared for next time. For expert
support on resilience, Liggy Webb's books are great resources (e.g.
Webb, 2013). Be kind to yourself and hold it all lightly.

First aid, fire safety and emergency services training aside, whatever
we do in L&D, remember that our learning offer is rarely a life and
death []{#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml_page_313 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 313"
role="doc-pagebreak"}situation, so hold it lightly. You can't please all
the people all of the time, so hold it lightly. There is always
something more important and we must keep perspective, so hold it
lightly. Sometimes, even an insignificant journey someone takes can
later prove to be a more important aspect of their life and learning. So
when they don't always show up to your learning, or don't fully embrace
the community you facilitate, or they don't share their homework, hold
it lightly. Celebrate that they showed up sometimes, that they at least
logged into the community, and that they at least did their homework.
Hold it lightly reminds us to celebrate what we can control, not worry
about what we cannot, and make better cake in the future as a result.

<figure id="_18_CHAPTER_C14_UFigure_14_2" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF002.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

[Life gets in the way of the
plans](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_18_CHAPTER_C14_h3_001)

If we don't provide an L&D offer to our learners, they will Google it,
ask their colleague, carry on doing what they always have. This is the
reality for our learners. They will not wait for L&D provision; people
are inventive and curious.

You may have a wonderful strategy for L&D, drawn directly from your
business strategy. You may have all your stakeholders on board and
raring to go, even offering funding. You may be armed with your
consultative questions, frameworks and ideas for effective learning
solutions. You may have developed and designed the best learning
programme, advertised it effectively and delivered it in the most
accessible way. And yet still, the learners do not come. It may all be
irrelevant if you cannot get learners away from their work, or away from
their family situations, to take part in your offer. There is nothing
more frustrating than building it and watching the tumbleweed roll by.

For most of us in L&D, we are not dealing with life or death. The ideas
in this book will work for some and not for others. Individual
organisations and people's contexts are key to success. Some people will
be able to implement great L&D ideas. Others work in places that demand
old-school L&D. We can only do what we can do. Life happens and it
totally and utterly gets in the way of the plans.

[]{#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml_page_314 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 314"
role="doc-pagebreak"}So please hold it lightly; gain and keep
perspective. Be kind to yourself. Measure success on more than numbers.
For those you do reach, know that you have offered your best to them.
Listen to their stories on how their learning has made a difference, on
how your work has made a difference. And for those you don't reach,
reflect on why for a moment, and then try again next time.

[The progression and growth of
learning](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_18_CHAPTER_C14_h3_002)

In our maturity as L&D practitioners, we are all at different stages and
all growing at different rates. And that's ok. Unlike growing up, our
journey in L&D is unlikely to be linear, nor does it need to be. Grow at
the pace of the organisation. You want any change to be successful *and*
sustainable, so be patient. Change is often described as like a tanker
turning in the sea. My Girlguiding colleague and OD guru, Dave Yates,
suggests change in an organisation is more like a flotilla of boats
which you need to get sailing vaguely in the same direction for
organisational change. He is right; rarely is change as streamlined or
smooth as one large ship sailing. It is random and haphazard and busy
and slow and hard to control and involves a lot of people. And this is
all ok. Hold it lightly.

Things take time. Don't be hard on yourself when you don't make an
immediate difference. Face-to-face trainers like the 9/10 score on the
evaluation form after a session. This is the history of L&D. We are used
to immediately knowing we made a difference. The legacy of this spills
into our psyche as L&Ders, but the immediate answers are not there. In a
TED talk titled 'Everyday Leadership', Drew Dudley describes how he
changed someone's life but didn't even known it until four years later
(Dudley, 2010). I became a Lead Volunteer with Girlguiding in 2017 with
the strategic intent to add to the volunteer learning proposition with
digital learning. My tenure may end without that yet being fully in
place. However, we have done a lot of the groundwork to enable digital
transformation. It will be a few more months before it happens. And
that's ok. I have to hold it lightly and celebrate how far we have come;
for example, training nearly 250 webinar trainers so we can add to the
learning proposition with live online classrooms. Focus on the positives
and be amazed at the achievements.

[Dial down
perfectionism](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_18_CHAPTER_C14_h3_003)

The levels of perfectionism in L&D, in my opinion, need to be dialled
down, to avoid burnout, but also to get a grip on the real world.
Learners in the []{#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml_page_315 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 315" role="doc-pagebreak"}real world -- those who are
cooking a new recipe, knitting a new pattern, studying a new subject,
wrestling with a new aspect of parenting -- are happy with a parenting
forum, an online textbook, a homemade YouTube video or a photo of a
recipe book text from a friend. Yet we spend months chipping away at the
rock to craft a perfect programme of polished stone. We don't need to
polish the stone before we reveal it to the world. We are better as
L&Ders if we offer a lump of rock to shape and polish it together; this
is much more effective, efficient, engaging and enjoyable for all. Show
your work, work out loud: these movements from John Stepper, Harold
Jarche and others have gained good traction for exactly these reasons.
People want learning to be real, socialised, effective, and to be able
to access it when they need it. If they craft their learning with you,
they own it much more willingly.

Over my career, I have noticed L&D professionals have the potential to
be quite hard on themselves; they focus on the missing the two points in
an 8/10 rating; the self-critic striving for perfection. I find it
fascinating to see my fellow L&Ders miss their marvellous successes by
giving laser focus to perceived failures. I much prefer the NixonMcInnes
approach to failure in their Church of Fail (Buchanan, 2013).

[Celebrate
success](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_18_CHAPTER_C14_h3_004)

Success comes from failure, and in holding it lightly we must celebrate
our successes, however small, for our own self esteem as a practitioner,
but also for the wider impact marketing of our work, and that stretches
to both our organisation's internal audience and the external wider L&D
community. A good story shared sparks ideas and thinking in others.

Some ideas for sharing success stories in internal celebrations are
lunchtime story sharing, industry magazines or corporate newsletters,
interviews with customers to have them share the impact of trained
staff, departmental cake Friday (insert food/drink/day of the week of
your choice). And for external validation and celebration, there are a
number of routes to get your success stories out there:

-   TV & podcasts -- Learning Now TV, The Good Practice podcast, CIPD
    podcast, etc.;

-   Webinar -- Learning and Skills Group webinar, guest on CIPD webinar,
    etc.;

-   Magazines -- *TJ*, *People Management*, *HR Director magazine*;

-   []{#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml_page_316 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 316"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}Awards -- People Management Awards, TJs from
    Training Journal, Learning Technologies Awards, The Learning Awards,
    plus a whole raft of specific trade awards.

[The complexity of
learning](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_18_CHAPTER_C14_h3_005)

When you unpack the complexity of what goes into a human being learning
something new, it is immense. We cannot underestimate the intricacy that
neuroscientists and psychologists have, for many decades, been studying.
I have no professional experience of either of those academic fields,
but I do know that learning as an adult can be hard. When learning is
constructed from a sound evidence base, is well thought out, and has
organisational support, it is amazing and helpful. It is exactly what
learners need it to be. But it is complex, there is no doubt. I
particularly like Amy Brann's book *Make Your Brain Work* (2013) for
help with understanding how complex it is for adult brains to learn.
Brann's book gives practical examples of how to create what another
practical neuroscientist, Stella Collins, calls 'brain friendly
learning' (Collins, 2016). It is possible to make our work more
memorable, appealing and engaging to our learners.

In learning something new, even with all our planning, our groundwork,
our frameworks, we cannot plan for every eventually. We cannot own it
all. I have discussed in this book how learners need to take ownership
of their own development. They need to want to progress. Without that,
nothing can be done. Of course, L&D can aid motivation to learn. And
this is all worth celebrating. As Nick Shackleton-Jones talked about in
a presentation at Learning Live 2019 about his book *How People Learn*,
'Celebrate successes, even the small ones, be positive and move the
agenda forward -- you are doing a great job as you have made a start in
looking how to practically do L&D in a new way for you'.

[Keep it
relevant](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_18_CHAPTER_C14_h3_006)

When you do new learning, whatever it is on your journey to digital and
social spaces, make it right for your context and the problem you are
trying to solve. By focusing our L&D on the relevance of our
organisational situations, getting managers on board will be easier. Why
make things hard for yourself? When managers are working with us, it
really helps us to land better L&D. When we make it easy for managers,
it helps solve the issue of why they would even care about L&D. They've
got their job to do, they've got business as usual, and increasingly
difficult circumstances -- Brexit, public
[]{#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml_page_317 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 317"
role="doc-pagebreak"}health situations, absent workers, deadlines,
financial cuts, customers, etc. We can't expect them to buy into L&D
because we ask nicely. We need to build better business cases, be closer
to their problems and solve them more efficiently. But if we don't do it
this time, learn for next time. Hold it lightly.

At times in L&D, you will take five steps forward and three steps back.
You will get some people onside and others not so much. You will
persuade some people learning is not just in the classroom, and have
others looking for certificates from courses. You will keep going
through all these backward steps and you will rise triumphantly. You
will be a leader, you will support people, you will gain advocacy. You
will bring people with you towards a more useful, successful, impactful,
efficient, effective, engaging and enjoyable workplace learning
experience.

Now, there is your clearest and most obvious first step towards a new
L&D strategy -- get people to care about learning, get people to value
what you offer to the business. That's the work. Do the work. I hope all
the suggestions and frameworks in this book have helped you with that.
Don't forget, no matter the journey to get there, we must celebrate our
achievements. Human life is littered with ceremony and rituals
celebrating coming of age, certifications, graduations, weddings,
significant birthdays; even funerals are the celebration of a life. We
are social creatures. We need to celebrate. We need to feel
accomplished. I believe that any learning offer that does not embrace
this crucial part of the process will never be quite 'finished'. Without
it, you will never know how much of a difference your L&D work made.

[L&D moving
forward](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_18_CHAPTER_C14_h3_007)

As a consequence of the Covid-19 pandemic, my predictions for L&D moving
forwards is that we have surpassed the need for a formal course-only
approach to learning. The pandemic has proven the need for learning in
the flow of work, in the moment of need. I believe that 'soft skills'
(which are misnamed, as they are hard!) will be the skills of the
future. Skills such as empathy, understanding, solving complex problems,
creativity, thinking quickly and strategically. These have all been
crucial in adapting to the significant challenges that the global
community has faced. Practical skills around finances, repurposing
talents, working quickly to scale, and agility have a part to play too.
These are skills learnt on the job, not in a physical classroom. L&D
needs to be where the skills are utilised, not offered in the abstract.
My one true hope for the future of our profession, indeed, for the
future of work is that we can all now slow down to go faster. We can
work []{#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml_page_318 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 318"
role="doc-pagebreak"}together to co-create a better future. The 2020
industry benchmark report *Back to the Future* clearly states:

> The most progressive and impactful organisations embed learning into
> the flow of life and ecosystem of the organisation. That means people
> buy in to the co-creating model. The best performers thrive because
> leaders, consumer-learners and learning professional change work
> together to identify, drive and deliver the critical capability goals
> of the organisation. (Daly, 2020, p67)

Perhaps my own predictions for the future of L&D are really just hopes
and wishes: will we really see the end of the classroom, or will we
simply all go back to what we know because it is easy, and easy is
comforting after times of significant disruption? Will we in L&D do the
right thing and call the classroom out for being a networking event with
purpose, so grow the networking element through more Unconferences and
open spaces instead of knowledge transfer sessions? Whatever happens, I
genuinely think the time for classroom-only learning is over. One of the
barriers to digital learning was laggards and tech access. They've had
no choice but to catch up. There's no reason to go back now, as we've
already had to embrace digital learning, and embraced it well.

I am a strong advocate for evidence-based practice, so I know it is too
early to see how things may evolve. Time will tell whether those who did
good thinking, spoke to people, didn't assume anything, took a
person-focused approach, and considered kind responses to recent global
events will emerge successful. When time does tell, we should all
celebrate this as a direction for our profession. In the meantime, I
reiterate, hold it lightly. All of it.

<aside aria-label="Case-Study (14.1)" class="case-study" epub:type="case-study" id="_18_CHAPTER_C14_sec_002" role="complementary">

<figure id="_18_CHAPTER_C14_UFigure_14_3" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF003.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

The case study in this chapter is my story of getting this learning
asset out into the world. It is has not been the easiest of journeys. To
be honest, birthing my three children was easier than writing this book
(and one of them took 45 hours in their
[]{#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml_page_319 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 319"
role="doc-pagebreak"}arrival!). I wanted to share it with you to help
you answer your questions about developing your L&D, obviously, but also
to remind you to hold it lightly.

THE BIRTH OF *THE LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT HANDBOOK*

**by Michelle Parry-Slater**

The process of writing a book has not been easy. Despite knowing this in
advance from authors such as Alison Jones, Laura Overton, Andy
Lancaster, Stella Collins and Katrina Collier, with whom I chatted about
the process, I was still taken aback. Indeed, it was quite the surprise
to me how challenging it has been. I am confident that I know my stuff
and, indeed, many people tell me that I do, including the many clients I
have worked with. If asked right now on a whim, I could talk about how
to be a modern L&D practitioner. Stick a camera or an audience in front
of me, and I could regale a tale for many an hour. So given this, and
the fact I really wanted to write this book, I was over the moon when
Kogan Page wanted me to write it too. I really wanted to offer something
in addition to the #NoPlasters tweet campaign to an audience of people
new to L&D or struggling to modernise their thinking and actions in L&D.

By all accounts, this book should have fallen out of me with ease. So
why so hard?

I could talk you through how life got in the way, how my little niece
had cancer, how my kids' school bus was cancelled, how we took time out
for our first long family holiday, how two of our dogs were ill and
about their recovery, how I had several funerals to endure, how I was
doing too much volunteering, and... and... and.... There is a question
of enthusiasm and realism in amongst all these things.

I could talk you through how much work I had on in organising a national
conference for Girlguiding volunteers, or completing clients' projects,
or making sales calls, staying on top of my CPD, or getting a full-time
job, then doing the full-time job during lockdown. There is the question
of time and money.

I could talk to you about paralysing imposter syndrome -- who am I to
write this stuff, what do I know, others will articulate it more
clearly, why me? Professionally, I had never published anything longer
than a blog before I wrote this. Taking 600-1,000 word blogs all the way
to 60,000--100,000 words felt like not just a mountain to climb, but a
whole range of mountains! There is the question of the size of the task.

But then, I could also talk to you about my book buddies, my supporters,
my cheer squad, my family, my friends, my editing husband, my
illustrator daughter and my publisher who made this happen. There is the
question of support.

You most probably would not be very interested in any of this -- I
wouldn't be if I were in your shoes; you are here to read about how to
be a modern learning practitioner, not hear such a story from the
author, whilst you are busy living, working, learning, homeschooling and
caring for others. There is the question of interest.

[]{#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml_page_320 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 320"
role="doc-pagebreak"}But this is the reality. This is the reality of
life, of learning, and of work. It was only when I eliminated as many of
the distractions, the complexities, and the other work that I could get
really focused on this project. There is a question of real life just
getting in the way of the plans.

I thought long and hard about why I wanted to write this book in the
first place. I thought about this a lot, especially when I thought about
stopping writing it several times. But I always knew my purpose was to
write the book for my former self, for corporate L&D me, for the lone
practitioner me who wanted to move away from things I knew were not
working but didn't quite know how to remedy that. I travelled a lonely
road initially. Alongside a very supportive boss, once I found my
Twitter PLN -- my tribe -- the travelling accelerated. And then I shared
my learnings via daily tweets to help others. It is there that my
purpose and motivation lies. I love helping others. I think it is why I
ended up in L&D -- seeing lightbulbs go on above people's heads. Knowing
my true purpose was the *only* thing that got me through this book
writing process. Focusing on former me. There is a question of purpose
and finding what motivates.

My experience of writing this book turned out to be a case study on how
we learn to do new things in work. This book came out kicking and
screaming. It wasn't an easy process, and this is just the same for
changing L&D. Modernising L&D in your organisation won't necessarily be
a simple process. There are so many distractions, competing priorities,
challenges, celebrations, and simply so much work to do. Writing never
seemed to find its way to the top of my 'to do' list. For your
colleagues, learning is often easily drowned out by their realities,
both in work and outside of work. Learning is often not easy.

How I felt in this process could be very much how your colleagues feel
when presented with something new, with change, with uncertainty. Where
do we start? Why should we do it? How can it be useful? What if I can't?
And how can I do all this *and* do my day job, my parenting, my caring,
and my volunteering?

Reflection was hugely helpful with getting this book written. As time
passed, having struggled with the process and with making time to
wrestle my words onto a page, with reflection I realised three things:

1.  I am not a writer, I am an L&D practitioner.

2.  Life gets in the way of the plans.

3.  I needed to ask for help but didn't feel I could.

These reflections helped me to ask myself better questions and accept my
realities. I could stop being such a perfectionist and simply try my
best, at times when I could write, to write. Consider these reflections
in the light of your colleagues becoming your learners.

1.  []{#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml_page_321 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 321"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}**I am not a writer, I am an L&D
    practitioner**. This whole process started with me being willing to
    write a book to help other L&D practitioners like me. But willing is
    not necessarily able. I wanted to share my ideas, but had no skills
    or knowledge in taking on this new task. As a learner driver, I
    wouldn't expect to get in a car and drive away. I was being too
    unrealistic about the task.

    -   Are your learners willing but without experience and skills to
        learn?

    -   How do you help your learners to learn?

    -   Do you support the process of learning to learn?

    -   Do you know how people learn?

2.  **Life gets in the way of the plans**. The busy-ness of life was
    manifold. It was intensely frustrating, and when I missed deadlines,
    I felt like a real failure, like I was letting people down. But life
    does get in the way. It was only when I released myself from my own
    unrealistic deadlines that I could get on with learning how to write
    a book.

    -   Are you making learning as easy as possible for people to engage
        with?

    -   People are busy and distracted -- how do you mitigate for that?

    -   Nobody has time for 13 clicks to get into their online learning
        -- how can you streamline that?

    -   Nobody has time for days and days out of the office to learn
        theory without thinking how to apply it -- how can you help with
        that?

    -   Are you trying to pack too much into your learning, making
        people feel overwhelmed?

    -   Is the process working with the flow of work and life or adding
        to the burden?

3.  **I needed to ask for help but didn't feel I could**. I am a
    professional trusted by a publisher to share my knowledge. This
    challenge was wrapped up in many things, such as imposter syndrome,
    not knowing who to ask for what, not knowing what I didn't know
    about the process of writing a book, plus totally romanticised and
    unrealistic expectations.

    -   How do you welcome your learners into something new?

    -   How do they understand the magnitude of the mountain they are
        about to climb?

    -   And how do you help them feel capable to take the journey?

    -   How do you surface what people don't know without compromise or
        embarrassment to them?

    -   []{#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml_page_322 .pagebreak
        aria-label="Page 322" role="doc-pagebreak"}Do you make it easy
        for people to ask for help they may need? There can be no silly
        questions. They are all valid and must be made welcome.

So now this is done, and I'm taking a dose of my own medicine from the
final chapter of the book and I will celebrate. But first I must get out
of my Shedquarters where this was all written and walk my patient dogs,
for it is in walking that I truly reflect and learn, and that, after
all, is the point of doing something new.

</aside>

[In
conclusion](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_18_CHAPTER_C14_h3_008)

I share my story and these reflections here for the clear and simple
reason that these types of thoughts, experiences and challenges will
typically be what will get in the way of the success of your L&D offer.
The reality of my life and experience will not mirror everyone's -- we
are all individuals living our own realities -- but will be as complex
and varied as the lives of the people you are trying to support with
learning: your learners, your line managers, your stakeholders, your
suppliers, your collaborators, your contributors, your finance team,
your senior managers, your c-suite, your organisation. Everyone. Each
will have their own complex, competing, challenging, exciting, amazing,
aspiring realities all playing into your L&D strategy to move towards
modern learning. All of us need to work within the reality of life. And
we need to hold it lightly. Progression in L&D will be made, eventually.
And that is OK.

One of my most lasting memories during my time as a consultant has been
a chat at a networking event in Brighton with Tom Nixon, formerly of
NixonMcInnes, following a showcase of their 'Church of Fail', which is
an opportunity to stand up and confess your mistakes to your colleagues
to celebrate the learning from that and discuss a way forward. Such rich
learning in the liberating freedom of honesty. I was reminded of this
humbling conversation recently when I saw this quote on a meme: *'*A
mistake that makes you humble is better than an achievement that makes
you arrogant'.

It is difficult to trace the origins of this quote (please enlighten me
if you know), so it is probably a mistake to publish it ungrounded. So I
offer you my mistakes and my learning from them in this my book in the
hope it helps you continue to make your own mistakes, hold them lightly,
celebrate their success and carry on making more. Learning and
development needs to rip off the plaster of comfort and enjoy a better,
healed future. #NoPlasters

<figure id="_18_CHAPTER_C14_UFigure_14_4" class="figure">
<p><span id="18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml_page_323" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 323" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF004.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_18_CHAPTER_C14_UFigure_14_9" class="figure"
aria-describedby="_18_CHAPTER_C14_UFigure_14_9_details">
<p><img src="content/images/M18UF001.png"
alt="The figure shows 4 clusters of factors." /></p>
<details id="_18_CHAPTER_C14_UFigure_14_9_details">
<summary>
Figure details
</summary>
<p>The factors are as follows:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Mindset: sense of perspective, a sense of achievement, be kind to
yourself</p></li>
<li><p>Skillset: ability to be balanced, ability to celebrate the
positive, ability to throw a party</p></li>
<li><p>Toolset: reflective practice, church of fail, personal learning
network, mindfulness</p></li>
<li><p>Dataset: list of successes, history of organization and
achievements</p></li>
</ul>
</details>
</figure>

<aside aria-label="Tip (14.2)" class="tip" id="_18_CHAPTER_C14_sec_004" role="complementary">

<figure id="_18_CHAPTER_C14_UFigure_14_5" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF005.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

<figure id="_18_CHAPTER_C14_UTable_14_1" class="table">
<span id="18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml_page_324" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 324" role="doc-pagebreak"></span>
<p><a href="#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml__18_CHAPTER_C14_sec_005">Skip
table</a></p>
<div class="table" role="table" tabindex="0">
<table class="left">
<thead>
<tr>
<th scope="col"><p>Tweet</p></th>
<th scope="col"><p>Tips checklist</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><p>07-Jul-15 Resilience to deal with the unexpected is a must whilst
evolving L&amp;D. Be strong and be kind to yourself #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Resilience is crucial. Build yours with
self-care</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>27-Aug-15 Late but today’s #NoPlasters when you feel overwhelmed,
choose one thing to do. Progress task by task, you’ll be surprised what
you get done. #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Progress is one step at a time</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>18-Sep-15 Surrounding yourself with inspiration is absolutely
necessary to move L&amp;D forward. Find people, blogs, news
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Find inspiration in others</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>30-Sep-15 Learning should be always be joyous. Laugh lots. Be
kind. Have fun. Make time for you. #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Make learning a joy</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>10-Nov-15 In times of change, people need to mourn passing of
times past. Celebrate successes and build on foundations
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Build on firm foundations</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>17-Nov-15 Still feel alone pushing your boulder uphill? Feel
supported &amp; enjoy selfcare time with L&amp;Ders at #LnDcowork
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Find others to support you</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>23-Nov-15 What small changes you can try? Little victories are
gold in building your case &amp; modern learning advocacy
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Celebrate the small stuff</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>30-Nov-15 As the festive period approaches think on how you can
celebrate successes in moving to modern learning #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Plan learning celebrations</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>01-Dec-15 It’s important to acknowledge achievements. Try an
awards event, or interviews with learners in a company mag
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Publicly celebrate learning</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>02-Dec-15 Invite teams to nominate colleagues with most improved
performance for celebration of learning success #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Celebrate performance</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>04-Dec-15 Celebrate your personal success whichever point of your
modem learning journey you’re on. Why not try a blog?
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Celebrate individuals</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>07-Dec-15 To celebrate #NoPlasters yearlong campaign to share
better learning ideas, I invite everyone to post their top tip.
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Invite people to share ideas</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>16-Dec-15 Never too late to join the #NoPlasters party. Dip your
toe in the water. Try new stuff. Share. #NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>It is never too late to try, just start</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>17-Dec-15 The penultimate tip, just jump in. Talking is good but
doing is better. Start somewhere, just start. Today.
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>It is never too late to start, do
something</strong></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><p>18-Dec-15 This last #NoPlasters tweet is a sincere thanks to all
&amp; a nudge that YOU can make workplace learning better. Start now.
#NoPlasters</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Celebrate with nudges</strong></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
</figure>

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (14.3)" class="box" id="_18_CHAPTER_C14_sec_005" role="complementary">

<figure id="_18_CHAPTER_C14_UFigure_14_6" class="figure">
<p><span id="18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml_page_325" class="pagebreak"
aria-label="Page 325" role="doc-pagebreak"></span><img
src="content/images/M01UF006.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   What are you struggling to start in your L&D makeover?

-   What is getting in the way of the shift in L&D?

-   Do you really know what is going on for your learners? Do you need
    to?

-   How can you build learning that respects the complexities of life?

-   What do you need to dial up and dial down to ensure relevance?

-   How has life got in the way of the plans? What, if anything, can you
    do to mitigate for that? Is it time to relax about the things we
    can't control?

-   What are your resilience levels like? Do you take too much on? Do
    you take too much personally? Who are your cheer squad? How do you
    monitor your energy?

-   Do you celebrate learning enough as an organisation, as cohorts and
    as individuals?

</aside>
<aside aria-label="Box (14.4)" class="box" id="_17_CHAPTER_C14_sec_006" role="complementary">

<figure id="_17_CHAPTER_C14_UFigure_14_7" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF007.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Be very clear on what you are trying to achieve in L&D.

-   Start somewhere, anywhere, just start.

-   If you are trying to turn a tanker in the ocean, consider it a
    flotilla and focus on one boat at a time.

-   Consider your personal resilience and build your supporting tribe.

-   Listen to your learners.

-   Go easy on yourself about things outside of your control.

-   []{#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml_page_326 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 326"
    role="doc-pagebreak"}Dial down the perfectionism, as learning is
    better co-created with your learners.

-   Audit your learning portfolio and check for relevance with your
    learners.

-   Plan celebration and sharing of learning as a standard part of your
    learning offer.

</aside>

::: {#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml__18_CHAPTER_C14_sec_007 .section .references .bibliography aria-label="THE LIBRARY LIST (14.5)" role="doc-bibliography"}
<figure id="_18_CHAPTER_C14_UFigure_14_8" class="figure">
<p><img src="content/images/M01UF008.png" role="presentation" /></p>
</figure>

-   Brann, A (2013) *Make Your Brain Work*, Kogan Page, London

-   Buchanan, L (2013) Welcome to the Church of Fail, *inc.com*
    \[online\]
    [[www.inc.com/magazine/201311/leigh-buchanan/nixonmcinnes-innovation-by-celebrating-mistakes.html]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.inc.com/magazine/201311/leigh-buchanan/nixonmcinnes-innovation-by-celebrating-mistakes.html)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/BB4R-74AK]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/BB4R-74AK))

-   Collins, S (2016) *Neuroscience for Learning and Development*, Kogan
    Page, London

-   Daly, J (2020) *Back to the Future: Why tomorrow's workforce needs a
    learning culture*, Emerald Works, London

-   Dudley, D (2010) Everyday Leadership, *TED Talks* \[online\]
    [[www.ted.com/talks/drew_dudley_everyday_leadership]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.ted.com/talks/drew_dudley_everyday_leadership)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/URE5-PWBL]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/URE5-PWBL))

-   Finnis, J (2014) Welcome to the Church of Fail, *Let's Get Real
    Conference* \[online\]
    [[www.letsgetrealconference.com/2014/blog/2014/07/08/welcome-to-the-church-of-fail/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.letsgetrealconference.com/2014/blog/2014/07/08/welcome-to-the-church-of-fail/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/BP9U-W2W4]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/BP9U-W2W4))

-   Shackleton-Jones, N (2019) *How People Learn*, Kogan Page, London

-   Stewart, H (2015) 8 companies that celebrate mistakes, *happy.co.uk*
    \[online\]
    [[www.happy.co.uk/blogs/8-companies-that-celebrate-mistakes/]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.happy.co.uk/blogs/8-companies-that-celebrate-mistakes/)
    (archived at
    [[https://perma.cc/BCJ4-WT2P]{.url-hyperlink}](https://perma.cc/BCJ4-WT2P))

-   Webb, L (2013) *Resilience: How to cope when everything around you
    keeps changing*, Capstone, Chichester
:::

[]{#19_ENDMATTER_Afterword.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

<div>

# []{#19_ENDMATTER_Afterword.xhtml_page_327 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 327" role="doc-pagebreak"}[Afterword](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_19_ENDMATTER_Afterword_sec_001) {#19_ENDMATTER_Afterword.xhtml__19_ENDMATTER_Afterword_h1_001 .title}

Helping people move to modern learning, one day at a time: The story of
#NoPlasters

</div>

We started our thinking together in this book by rooting your reading of
it firmly into your own context. I never wanted this book to come across
as the one true way to modern Learning and Development practice. It is
presented as a selection of suggestions which could work should you wish
to adapt and try them your own way. You have been encouraged to try
stuff out for yourself. If the stuff works for you and your
organisation, that is down to your context, circumstances, skills,
budget, energy levels, and so on. I am reminded here of Phil Willcox
from Emotion At Work who says context is king.

Imagine then, if you will, the context in which this book is brought to
you today. It is New Year's Eve 2014. I have been a freelance L&D
practitioner for six months. I have been to, and spoken at, some
cracking conferences. I have been tweeting for a few years. I have been
to many an #LSGwebinar. I had been working in L&D for a decade and a
half at the time. I have never had an L&D budget, having had to fight
for every penny I spent in all my corporate roles by building business
cases for the value of L&D. For years in my corporate life, I
facilitated learning; no, let's be honest, I delivered training. We all
did back in the day. We were the 'sage on the stage'. And I was aware
even then that this was not my best me. I travelled for work a lot, so
often in training I was the person who showed up, crumpled and 'fresh'
off the plane having got up at 4 a.m. and crept around the house so as
not to wake the three sleeping children, husband and the dog again.
Every week for months. This was no life. This was no good for me, for my
family, and certainly not for my colleagues who were trying to learn
from me. Whilst I was in Moscow, what if Madrid had a question? In those
pre-wifi days, if I was travelling, how was I encouraging people to
continue their learning? Whilst I was hanging out in airports, low on
Blackberry battery, in different time zones, exhausted from thinking and
speaking all day long, how was I really adding value to this thing they
called L&D? We counted bums on seats, not impact. We counted visits to
offices, not usefulness. We did what
[]{#19_ENDMATTER_Afterword.xhtml_page_328 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 328" role="doc-pagebreak"}every other corporate L&D
department did -- we did stuff because doing stuff means we were working
hard. I worked very hard.

And then I got promoted. Up to then, I had been doing all this as
European Training Manager. The role then went global. More of me and my
training buddy on a plane. More of me crumpled and less fresh than the
time before. More counting visits to countries and battering my passport
in air miles, rather than bettering my colleagues in knowledge. No, this
was not the best way. This was not the best me. This was not the best
anything. It was at that point I looked for another way. My colleagues
deserved me on a good day, every day. They deserved me when they needed
me. They deserved more than me, they deserved each other too. We looked
to go digital.

Our organisation became the first global customer of a next-generation
learning platform, Fuse. The implementation of the platform was so
immediately successful, I found myself in the Towards Maturity Top Deck,
and I ultimately found myself out of a job. Peer-to-peer learning
negated the need for formal training from months past. Instead, my
travelling took me to conferences, speaking to people about our story
and how it could become their story. I found myself increasingly
interested in other ways you can take a trainer and make them digital.
The world of learning technologies, of digital and social learning, of
truly blending learning, of Twitter and online communities all became my
life, my professional practice, and my huge area of interest so I set up
my consultancy. Kairos Modern Learning was born on my youngest
daughter's 6th birthday, 1st July, 2014.

And so it is from this random set of circumstances that at New Year 2015
I realised there must be other people like me, who wanted to break out
from how they were doing L&D, to offer their best experts at their best
every day, to encourage communities of practice to spring up, to get the
best from social learning, to evaluate better and use data to make
better decisions. I figured my new consultancy business would have about
two years before everyone 'got it' and I had to find another real job (I
wasn't quite right on that one!). So, I decided I'd better share what I
know, and share it quick. I wanted to be able to help other
practitioners, sole practitioners working in organisations trying to do
something new with how they approach learning. If I could just help one
person, then it was worth doing. But how?

I loved Twitter, and still do. I learn a lot from the people there, the
'Tweeps'. I was a real fan of many of the Twitterati, who all seemed
like real experts and L&D gods -- people like Gemma Dale, Julie
Drybrough, Niall Gavin, Andrew Jacobs, Andy Lancaster, Laura Overton,
Sukh Pabial, Donald Taylor, Perry Timms -- people who in the early days
reached me through this []{#19_ENDMATTER_Afterword.xhtml_page_329
.pagebreak aria-label="Page 329" role="doc-pagebreak"}medium of what was
then 140 characters. At the time, I had been active on Twitter but never
really found a groove. I had had some great chats and challenges via
this social media platform, but was more a lurker than a poster.

In a seemingly insignificant moment, the hashtag #NoPlasters was born on
8th September, 2014 as a response to a presentation I had given in which
I talked of 'injection education'. \@MaguireTraining asked over Twitter,
'What's injection education? Is it painful? Does it require a plaster?'
(Band-Aids for any American-English readers.) In that in instant,
#NoPlasters was born as I rallied against that sense of sticking
plasters over stuff to make it better. Down with injection education!
This was about moving away from the 'cure-all' L&D solutions of
classroom or e-learning, which gave people a one-stop opportunity to be
'cured', injected with education, and sent on their way back to business
as usual. The better choice away from injection education was to favour
the right solutions to solve the right problems in business. That
doesn't need sticking plaster solutions, it needs real investigation and
treatment at the root cause. The idea that we use learning as a way of
sticking a plaster over a business problem was so true in L&D (and, to
be fair, still is in many organisations). Because we were not so hot on
proving the worth of L&D (evaluation stopped at Kirkpatricks' level 1:
how was the trainer, how hot/cold was the training room, and how were
the coffee and biscuits?), our sticking plaster solutions seemed to be
pretty effective. But they weren't. They were rubbish. But if we don't
know any other way, we have to settle for mediocre. People had a good
time, people enjoyed chatting with others, people liked the biscuits. If
my experience has taught me anything, it is not about the biscuits,
people, it is really not all about the biscuits, but
#NotAboutTheBiscuits was too long for a hashtag back in the 140
character days, so #NoPlasters it was!

I tweeted on the #NoPlasters hashtag occasionally during late 2014, but
it was only when we got towards the New Year that I felt more pushed to
do something constructive along the lines of moving away from injection
education. In a New Year moment -- perhaps something to do with
resolutions, in turning over a new leaf, the midnight champagne --
sparked the idea that I could tweet every day to help people in L&D. One
tweet, one thought, one idea, one practical thing people could do to
move their L&D practice on. I launched a daily tweet campaign with my
blog on 5th January, 2015 -- '2015: The How of Doing'.

And that is how #NoPlasters came into being as a movement away from
cure-all snake oil injection education, towards better workplace
learning. I []{#19_ENDMATTER_Afterword.xhtml_page_330 .pagebreak
aria-label="Page 330" role="doc-pagebreak"}tweeted what came to mind,
influenced by trade publications, other Tweeps, my client work, blogs I
had read -- anything really. There was no structure, no agenda, no
planning, no themes, although I did notice later in preparation for this
book that that themes had emerged. It was authentic in-the-moment daily
tweeting. A real micro blog experience. I never imagined that from 2016
it would turn into a regular piece on Learning Now TV, and now into this
book.

People engaged in the process. One Tweep, Kevin Maye, who you have heard
from in [Chapter 1](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml), described the experience as
serendipitous and random. He collated the weekly tweets and was inspired
to make a weekly video of 90 seconds, like the 140 characters of the
tweet, called #WatchMyWay. You can get a lot across in a short amount of
video or a tweet. He shared real stories such as 'What mistake have you
made and learnt from?' He went on to be an award winner. I learnt from
#NoPlasters that you never know who you are influencing when you share
on social media. It taught me to always share generously and kindly. It
was quite the life-changing experience.

Thank you for reading this book. In the spirit of it and reflective
practice, I invite you as peer practitioners into my personal learning
network. Connect with me on Twitter \@MiPS1608 and let me know your L&D
strategies, reflections and celebrations. Where will your journey take
you? What is your #NoPlasters hashtag? I look forward to being inspired
by you.

[]{#20_ENDMATTER_IDX.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

::: {#20_ENDMATTER_IDX.xhtml__20_ENDMATTER_IDX_sec_001 .section .index .index aria-labelledby="_20_ENDMATTER_IDX_h1_001" role="doc-index"}
# []{#20_ENDMATTER_IDX.xhtml_page_331 .pagebreak aria-label="Page 331" role="doc-pagebreak"}[Index](#00_PRELIMS_s10_Contents.xhtml#toc_20_ENDMATTER_IDX_sec_001) {#20_ENDMATTER_IDX.xhtml__20_ENDMATTER_IDX_h1_001 .title}

Page numbers in *italic* indicate figures or tables

#MeToo [273](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_273)

#NoPlasters [20--](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_20)21,
[27](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_27),
[284](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_284),
[319](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_319),
[327](#19_ENDMATTER_Afterword.xhtml#page_327)--30

3Rs framework 13, *[241](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_241)*,
[241](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_241)--61

3Rs in action [262](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_262)--63

doing it right [263](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_263)--64

purposeful learning [244](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_244)

referred [242](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_242),
[252](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_252)--55

keys to success [253](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_253)

reflection *[260](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_260)*,
[260--](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_260)61

required [242](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_242),
[245](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_245)--48

cutting back [246](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_246)--48

resourced [242](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_242),
[248](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_248)--51

and heutagogy [249](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_249)

cake theory [250](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_250)

three boxes *[253](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_253)*,
[254](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_254)

three boxes plus assets *[254](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_254)*,
[254](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_254)

three boxes plus assets plus
journey [254--](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_254)55,
*[255](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_255)*

three boxes plus assets plus journey plus community 255,
*[256](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_256)*

5 Whys technique [247](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_247),
[305](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_305)

6 Stage Model [99](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_99)

7/7 attacks [273](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_273)

9 Events [257](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_257)--58

9/11 attacks [273](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_273)

70:20:10 approach [168](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_168)--69,
[287](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_287)

70:20:10 Institute [169](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_169)

*101 Half Connected Things *[166](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_166)

360 degree reviews

in L&D [19](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_19)

in the wider business [17](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_17)

505 technique [298](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_298)--99

Acteon [132](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_132)--34

reflections on [135](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_135)

ADDIE (Analysis, Design, Development, Implementation,
Evaluation) [100](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_100),
[259](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_259)

Adobe Spark [146](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_146)

Adult Learning Theory [14](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_14)

AGES model [199](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_199),
[242](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_242)

Agile [286](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_286)--87

Amazon [249](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_249)

Alexa [152](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_152)

analytics [97](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_97)

Anders Pink [12](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_12),
[127](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_127),
[249](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_249)

andragogy [202](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_202)

apprenticeships, shift in [10](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_10),
[276](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_276)--77

artificial intelligence (AI) [103](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_103)

autonomy, mastery and purpose [206](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_206)

Avado [281](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_281)

Aylesbury Vale District Council [152](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_152)

*Back to the Future* [318](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_318)

Bandura, Albert [120](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_120)

Barcamp [297](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_297)

big data [97](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_97)

Bing [250](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_250)

Block, Peter [79](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_79),
[80](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_80)

Bloom, Benjamin [274](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_274)

'brain-friendly learning' [316](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_316)

Brandon Hall Excellence Awards [155](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_155)

Brann, Amy [99](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_99),
[199](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_199),
[316](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_316)

Breeio [133](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_133)

Brexit [273](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_273),
[316](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_316)

Briner, Rob [74](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_74),
[75](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_75)

Brinkerhoff, Robert [95](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_95),
[99](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_99)

Britz, Mark and Tyer, James [119](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_119)

brown bag sessions *see* lunch and learns

Bruner, Jerome [274--](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_274)75

'bumblebees' and 'butterflies' [177](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_177)

'burning platforms' [272](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_272),
[274](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_274)

BYOD (bring your own device) [234](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_234)

cake theory [60--](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_60)61,
[205](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_205),
[232](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_232),
[250](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_250),
[272](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_272)

Calendly [128](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_128)

career management [84](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_84)

Carney, Lucinda [77](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_77)

case studies

3Rs in action [262](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_262)--63

doing it right [263](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_263)--64

Channel 4 and Acteon [132](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_132)--34

reflections on [135](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_135)

EPC in action [233](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_233)--36

doing it right [236](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_236)

game-changing L&D [282](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_282)--88

reflections on [288](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_288)

Girlguiding Filtered trial [156](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_156)--58

reflections on [158](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_158)--59

global manufacturing business [63](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_63)--64

reflections on [64--](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_64)65

Good Things Foundation [20--](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_20)21

reflections on [21](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_21)--22

ICE in action [210--](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_210)11

doing it right [211](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_211)

*L&D Handbook*, writing of [319](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_319)--22

OCM Group, The [181](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_181)--83

reflections on [183](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_183)--84

Providence Health Care [42](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_42)--45

reflections on [45](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_45)

Reach plc [108](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_108)--11

reflections on [111](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_111)

Virtual College [85](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_85)--89,
*[88](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_88)*,
[199](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_199),
[221](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_221)

reflections on [89](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_89)

World Vision [303](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_303)--05

CEDAR feedback model [301](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_301)

Center for Evidence-Based Management [74](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_74)

'change fatigue' [275](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_275),
[278](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_278)

Channel 4 [132](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_132)--34

reflections on [135](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_135)

Charity Learning Consortium [303](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_303)

Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development
(CIPD) [9](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_9)

#OneTeam [51](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_51)

assessment tools [171](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_171)

Avado partnership [281](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_281)

evaluation [101](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_101)

Festival of Work [297](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_297)

*Learning and Skills at Work*

continuing professional development for
L&Ders [170--](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_170)71

face-to-face learning [143](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_143),
[169](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_169)--70

L&D strategy [27](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_27)--28

measuring learning [180](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_180)

'prioritise, digitise, socialise and
humanise' [166](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_166)

podcasts [315](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_315)

profession map [171](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_171)

*Professionalising Learning and
Development *[28](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_28)

*Putting Social Media to Work *[234](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_234)

Team at Three [253](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_253)

webinars [315](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_315)

Church of Fail [315](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_315),
[322](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_322)

Churchill War Rooms [228](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_228)

Clark, Donald [154](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_154)

Clever Nelly [154](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_154)

Coates, Michelle [303](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_303)--05

Collier, Katrina [319](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_319)

Collins, Stella [199](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_199),
[242](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_242),
[316](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_316),
[319](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_319)

*Communities of Practice *[127](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_127)

communities of practice [127](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_127)--30,
[252](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_252)

competence, unconscious to
conscious *[302](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_302)*,
[302](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_302)

compliance training [130](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_130)

consultants, external [72](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_72)

continuing professional development
(CPD) [77](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_77)--78,
[170--](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_170)71

skills auditing [19](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_19),
[171](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_171)

contracting [78](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_78)--79,
[81](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_81)

Cook, Jo [297](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_297)

Couzins, Martin [297](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_297)

Covey, Stephen [95](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_95),
[245](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_245)

Covid--19 pandemic, impact of [11](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_11),
[233](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_233),
[273](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_273)

'digital poverty' [222](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_222)

flexible working [151](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_151)

Girlguiding example [12](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_12)

human connection, need for [150](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_150)

online networking [176](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_176)

remote learning [142](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_142),
[226](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_226),
[280](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_280)

remote working [152](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_152)

social tools, use of [130](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_130)

'soft skills' [317](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_317)

'Zoom fatigue' [150](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_150)

'critical friend', being a [29](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_29),
[70](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_70), [73](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_73)

Cross, Jay [144](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_144)

Csíkszentmihályi, Mihaly [195](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_195)--96,
[209](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_209)

*Cultivating Communities of
Practice *[129](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_129)

CURATE model [203](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_203)

curation, of content [126](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_126)--27

Customer Experience model [55](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_55)

'daisy constellation' 56, *[56](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_56)*,
[57](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_57)

Dale, Gemma [328](#19_ENDMATTER_Afterword.xhtml#page_328)

data, defining [97](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_97)

data mining [80](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_80),
[97](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_97)

Deming, W Edwards [64](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_64)

de Saint-Exupery, Antoine [37](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_37)

Design Museum [228](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_228)

Design Thinking [55](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_55),
[208](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_208),
[284--](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_284)85

detractors, engaging [53](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_53),
[57](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_57)

cake theory [60--](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_60)61

difficult conversations [58](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_58)--60

Dickinson, Tim [101](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_101)

digital access [148](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_148)--49

*Digital Learning in
Organisations *[144](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_144)

digital learning, reasons for [152](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_152)--53

'digital poverty' [222](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_222)

Donne, John [50](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_50)

Doodle Poll [128](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_128)

*Drive *[209](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_209),
[242](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_242)

*Driving Performance Through
Learning *[97](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_97)

Drybrough, Julie [300](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_300),
[328](#19_ENDMATTER_Afterword.xhtml#page_328)

D'Souza, David [166](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_166)

Dudley, Drew [314](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_314)

Dyer, Chris [218](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_218)

Ebbinghaus, Hermann [198](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_198)

EBI (Even better if...) [102](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_102),
[248](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_248),
[296](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_296)

EECC feedback model [301](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_301)

eLearning Guild, The [142](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_142)

Elephants Don't Forget [154](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_154)

Emerald Works

Good Practice [13](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_13)

podcasts [78](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_78),
[121](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_121),
[297](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_297),
[315](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_315)

research reports [13](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_13),
[125](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_125),
[250](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_250)

Health Check benchmarking reports [17](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_17),
[75](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_75),
[102](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_102),
[171](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_171)

Emotion at Work [327](#19_ENDMATTER_Afterword.xhtml#page_327)

emotive effect of change [275](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_275)--76

*Energized Workplace, The *[131](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_131),
[143](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_143)

EPC framework *[217](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_217)*,
[217](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_217)--33,
[243](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_243)

culture [218](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_218),
[219](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_219),
[229](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_229)--32

changing [230--](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_230)31

pain points, finding [231](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_231)

environment [219](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_219),
[220--](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_220)25

digital space [222](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_222)--23

environmental footprint [225](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_225)

physical space [220--](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_220)21

supporting learning [224--](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_224)25

EPC in action [233](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_233)--36

doing it right [236](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_236)

permission [219](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_219),
[225](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_225)--29

behaviours, modelling [226](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_226)--27

creative thinking
opportunities [227](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_227)--28

digital space [225](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_225)--26

failure to address [228](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_228)--29

European Mentoring Coaching Council
(EMCC) [181](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_181),
[182](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_182)

evaluation, defining [98](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_98)

evaluation surveys [94--](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_94)95

Eventbrite [128](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_128)

Evernote [126](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_126)

*Evidence Informed Learning Design *[74](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_74)

evidence, using [74--](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_74)75

evidence-based vs evidence-informed [74](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_74)

sources of [75](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_75)

*Exploring the World of Social
Learning *[120](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_120),
[125](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_125)

Facebook [251](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_251)

face-to-face learning, issues
with [9](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_9)--10,
[12](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_12)

facilitation [80](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_80),
[173](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_173)--74

Feedly [126](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_126)

feelings, discussing [53](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_53)

'Fifth Discipline' [282](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_282)

Filtered [249](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_249)

Girlguiding trial [156](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_156)--58

reflections on [158](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_158)--59

financial crashes, 1997 and 2007 [273](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_273)

fixed mindset, shedding your [165](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_165)--66

Flawless Consulting [79](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_79)--81

collaborative consulting [79](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_79)--80

expert [79](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_79)

pair of hands [79](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_79)

flexible working [273](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_273)

'flipping the classroom' [175](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_175)--76

*Flow *[195](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_195)

forgetting curve [198](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_198)

Four Levels of Training Evaluation
Method [99](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_99)

Frances-White, Deborah [144](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_144)

Fuse [28](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_28)

FutureLearn [147](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_147)

Gagne, Robert [242](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_242),
[257](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_257)

game-changing L&D [282](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_282)--88

reflections on [288](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_288)

Gavin, Niall [328](#19_ENDMATTER_Afterword.xhtml#page_328)

Girlguiding [31](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_31)--33,
*[32](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_32)*,
[251](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_251),
[319](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_319)

Filtered trial [156](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_156)--58

reflections on [158](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_158)--59

first aid courses [12](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_12)

'holding it lightly' [314](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_314)

Padlet, use of [251](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_251)

Slack, use of [263](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_263)

Global Sentiment Survey [17](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_17)

Goldberg, Natalie [300](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_300)

Good Things Foundation [20--](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_20)21

reflections on [21](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_21)--22

Google [118](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_118),
[143](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_143),
[250](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_250),
[251](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_251),
[313](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_313)

Google Meet [128](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_128),
[142](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_142),
[195](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_195)

G-Suite [223](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_223)

gut instinct [72](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_72)

'happy sheets' [167](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_167)

Harrison, Nigel [81](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_81)

Hart, Jane [295](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_295)

Hayden, David [37](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_37),
[202](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_202),
[295](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_295)

heutagogy [202](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_202),
[206](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_206),
[249](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_249)

*How People Learn* [316](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_316)

*How to be a Change Super Hero *[77](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_77)

*HR Director *[315](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_315)

hypothesis, defining [98](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_98)

Ibis Styles [221](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_221)

ICE framework *[193](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_193)*,
[194--](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_194)210,
[243](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_243)

Adult Learning Theory [202](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_202)--03

communication [194](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_194),
[197](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_197)

curation, of content [203](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_203)--04

drive [209](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_209)--10

education [194](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_194)

flow [195](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_195),
[198](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_198),
[207](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_207),
[209](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_209)

ICE in action [210--](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_210)11

doing it right [211](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_211)

information [194](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_194),
[197](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_197)

crucial [200](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_200)

functional [200](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_200)

multifaceted [200](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_200)

motivation to learn [205](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_205)--06

repetition [198](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_198)

storytelling [204--](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_204)05

IDEA feedback model [301](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_301)

induction [176](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_176),
[200](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_200)

Industrial Revolution [195](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_195),
[205](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_205)

'injection education' [150](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_150),
[166](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_166),
[198](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_198),
[251](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_251),
[329](#19_ENDMATTER_Afterword.xhtml#page_329)

Instagram [16](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_16),
[172](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_172),
[261](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_261)

Instructional Design [287](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_287)

International Accreditation Forum (IAF)

Code of Conduct [174](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_174)

Jacobs, Andrew [18](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_18),
[72](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_72),
[224](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_224),
[231](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_231),
[328](#19_ENDMATTER_Afterword.xhtml#page_328)

Jarche, Harold [71](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_71),
[203](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_203),
[295](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_295),
[315](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_315)

Jennings, Charles [168](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_168),
[298](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_298)

Jones, Alison [50](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_50),
[319](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_319)

Kairos Modern Learning [76](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_76),
[328](#19_ENDMATTER_Afterword.xhtml#page_328)

values of [76](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_76)--79

Katzell, Raymond [99](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_99)

Kelly, David [142](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_142)

key performance indicators (KPIs)

for learners [19](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_19),
[37](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_37),
[83](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_83), [98](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_98)

for people development [15](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_15),
[96](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_96)--97,
[220](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_220)

Khan, Hayley [85](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_85)--89

Kingfisher Coaching [53](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_53)

Kirkpatrick, Donald [99](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_99)

Kirschner, Paul and Neelen, Mirjam [74](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_74)

Kline, Nancy [71](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_71),
[301](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_301)

Knowles, Malcolm [202](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_202),
[206](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_206)

Kondo, Marie [246](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_246)

'L&Ders', defining [9](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_9)

Lancaster, Andy [73](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_73),
[97](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_97),
[203](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_203),
[228](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_228),
[319](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_319),
[328](#19_ENDMATTER_Afterword.xhtml#page_328)

'landing the learning' [176](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_176)

language [106](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_106)

and history [277](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_277)

in evaluation [106](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_106)

'language of learning' [172](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_172)

Lave, Jean [127](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_127)

Lean Six Sigma [305](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_305)

learners, identifying your [13](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_13)--14

Learning & Performance Institute (LPI)

Capability Map [171](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_171)

Learning & Skills Group [297](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_297),
[315](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_315)

*Learning and Development Practice in the
Workplace *[202](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_202)

*Learning and Skills at Work*

continuing professional development for
L&Ders [170--](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_170)71

face-to-face learning [143](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_143),
[169](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_169)--70

L&D strategy [27](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_27)--28

measuring learning [180](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_180)

'prioritise, digitise, socialise and
humanise' [166](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_166)

Learning Awards, The [155](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_155),
[316](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_316)

Learning Live 2019 [316](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_316)

Learning Needs Analysis (LNA) [282](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_282)

Learning Now TV [75](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_75),
[315](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_315)

Learning Technologies conference [144](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_144)

Learning Technologies Awards [155](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_155),
[316](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_316)

*Learning Technologies in the
Workplace *[144](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_144)

'learning transfer' [100](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_100)

LearningNews.com [126](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_126)

Learning-Transfer Evaluation Method
(L-TEM) [99](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_99)

Lightbulb Moment Community [297](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_297)

line managers, role of [15](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_15),
[220](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_220)

in the 3Rs framework [248](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_248)

LinkedIn [16](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_16),
[172](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_172),
[249](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_249),
[261](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_261)

Listly [126](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_126)

'lunch and learns' [14](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_14),
[123](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_123)--24,
[243](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_243),
[253](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_253)

Lynch, Kirsty [108](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_108)--11

macro vs micro thinking [35](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_35),
[37](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_37)--39,
[41](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_41)

*Make Your Brain Work *[99](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_99),
[316](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_316)

Marlow, Katherine [42](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_42)--45

Massive Open Online Courses
(MOOCs) [148](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_148),
[156](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_156),
[252](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_252)

Matthews, Paul [100](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_100),
[102](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_102)

Maye, Kevin [20--](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_20)21,
[330](#19_ENDMATTER_Afterword.xhtml#page_330)

measurement, defining [98](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_98)

mentoring [122](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_122),
[252](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_252)

meta learning [107](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_107)

metrics, defining [98](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_98)

Microsoft

365 suite [223](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_223)

Planner [251](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_251)

Teams [118](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_118),
[128](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_128),
[150](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_150),
[222](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_222),
[251](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_251)

Miro [251](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_251)

Mother Pukka [151](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_151)

Moules, Jonathan [276](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_276)

Museum of Science and Industry [228](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_228)

Narrative Engagement Technology
(NET) [204](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_204)

near-field communication (NFC) [201](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_201)

Nell Bank [221](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_221)

net promoter score (NPS) [36](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_36)--37

Netflix [249](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_249)

networking [176](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_176)--77

Nixon, Tom [322](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_322)

NixonMcInnes [315](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_315),
[322](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_322)

OCM Group, The [181](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_181)--83

reflections on [183](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_183)--84

Office Lens [304](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_304)

Open Space events [177](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_177)

organisational development (OD) [39](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_39)--40,
[71](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_71),
[230](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_230)

and communities of practice [129](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_129)

Overton, Laura [328](#19_ENDMATTER_Afterword.xhtml#page_328),
[319](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_319)

Pabial, Sukhvinder [328](#19_ENDMATTER_Afterword.xhtml#page_328),
[319](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_319)

Padlet [251](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_251)

Parsloe, Ed [181](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_181)--83

Pearl, David [177](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_177)

peer-to-peer learning [252](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_252)

*People Management *[315](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_315)

*People Management* Awards [155](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_155),
[316](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_316)

perfectionism [314--](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_314)15

Performance Consulting [81](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_81)--82

'Personal Knowledge Mastery' [71](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_71)

personal learning network (PLN) [15](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_15)--17,
[54](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_54),
[78](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_78),
[122](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_122)

Pettigrew, Ian [53](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_53),
[54](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_54), [55](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_55)

Phillips, Jack [99](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_99)

Pink, Daniel [206](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_206),
[209](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_209),
[242](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_242)

Pinterest [126](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_126)

Pocket [126](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_126)

Porter, Michael [105](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_105)

*Power of Company Culture, The *[218](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_218)

PowerPoint [145](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_145)

'presenting problem', the [81](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_81)

*Professionalising Learning and
Development *[28](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_28)

Providence Health Care [42](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_42)--45

reflections on [45](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_45)

purposeful learning [244](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_244)

*Putting Social Media to Work *[234](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_234)

QR codes [39](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_39),
[201](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_201)

qualitative evidence [96](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_96)

and context [104](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_104)

quantitative evidence [96](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_96)

and credibility [104](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_104)

Reach plc [108](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_108)--11

reflections on [111](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_111)

recognition-primed decision making [72](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_72)

recruitment strategy [279](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_279)--80

reflective practice [293](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_293)--302

case studies, using [294](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_294)

feedback, seeking [300--](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_300)01

group [296](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_296)--97

note-taking [299](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_299)

personal learning networks (PLNs) [297](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_297)

solo [296](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_296)

support networks [297](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_297)--98

Thinking Environment [301](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_301)

'What did you learn this week?'
(WDYLTW) [298](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_298)

wild writing [300](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_300)

resilience [312](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_312)

responsive pace [286](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_286)--87

Resuscitation Council UK [178](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_178)

return on experience (ROE) [99](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_99),
[104](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_104)

return on investment (ROI) [99](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_99)

River Island [285](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_285)

Rock, David [199](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_199),
[242](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_242)

Royal Bank of Scotland [283](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_283)

Salesforce

Chatter [236](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_236)

Santa Fe Group [153](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_153)--54,
[173](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_173)

SBI feedback model [301](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_301)

SCAMPER [305](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_305)

Scoop.it [126](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_126)

Sea Salt Learning [120](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_120)

Seek-Sense-Share framework [203](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_203)

Senge, Peter [282](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_282)

Service Design [55](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_55),
[208](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_208)

setbacks, dealing with [312](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_312)

Shackleton-Jones, Nick [316](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_316)

Shaw, Doug [149](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_149)

'sheep-dip' learning [147](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_147)

'shopkeeper to engineer' [19](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_19),
[72](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_72)

Sinek, Simon [281](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_281)

Situated Learning [127](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_127)

Six Sigma [63](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_63)

Skill, Will, Resource and
Authority [231](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_231)

skills auditing

in L&D [19](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_19),
[171](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_171)

in the wider business [17](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_17),
[279](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_279)

Sky [287](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_287)

Skype [128](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_128),
[130](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_130)

Slack [263](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_263)

smartphones [12](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_12)

Snapchat [299](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_299)

*Social Leadership Handbook, The *[125](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_125)

Social Learning Theory [120](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_120)

'solutioneering' [70](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_70),
[166](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_166)

Southwark Council [222](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_222)

'spider's web' 56, *[57](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_57)*

stakeholders, your [51](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_51)--52

consultative conversations [61](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_61)

detractors, engaging [53](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_53),
[57](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_57)

cake theory [60--](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_60)61

difficult conversations [58](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_58)--60

influencers [52](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_52),
[53](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_53), [57](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_57)

learning environment, the [223](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_223)--24

relationship building [56](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_56)--58

'daisy constellation' 56, *[56](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_56)*,
[57](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_57)

'spider's web' 56, *[57](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_57)*

stakeholder mapping [55](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_55)

'strategic latte', the [53](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_53)--55,
[59](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_59)

who's who, your [52](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_52)--53

Stepper, John [315](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_315)

sticky learning [200](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_200)

Stodd, Julian [120](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_120),
[125](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_125),
[130--](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_130)31,
[203](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_203),
[204](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_204),
[275](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_275)

stories, organisational [278](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_278)

'strategic latte', the [53](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_53)--55,
[59](#05_CHAPTER_C03.xhtml#page_59)

strategy, company [28](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_28)--29,
[41](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_41)

getting to know [34--](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_34)36,
[71](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_71)

interpreting [33](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_33)--34

purpose of [30](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_30)

Street Wisdom [177](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_177)

string theory [40--](#04_CHAPTER_C02.xhtml#page_40)41

subject matter experts [14](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_14),
[174--](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_174)75,
[208](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_208)--09

Success Case Method [99](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_99)

Survey Monkey [94](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_94)

systems thinking [208](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_208),
[230](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_230)

tacit knowledge, managing [124--](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_124)26

Tate Modern [228](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_228)

Taylor, Donald H [17](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_17),
[144](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_144),
[328](#19_ENDMATTER_Afterword.xhtml#page_328)

technology adoption curve [279](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_279)

TED talks [16](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_16),
[147](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_147),
[148](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_148),
[226](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_226),
[314](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_314)

Tesla, Nikola [123](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_123)

Thalheimer, Will [99](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_99)

Thinking Environment [301](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_301)

'Time to Think' [71](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_71)

Timms, Perry [104](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_104),
[131](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_131),
[282](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_282)--88,
[328](#19_ENDMATTER_Afterword.xhtml#page_328)

*TK *[315](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_315)

Towards Maturity [17](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_17)

benchmark reports *see* Emerald Works Health Check benchmarking reports

*Challenging Perceptions *[151](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_151)

Toyota [247](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_247)

'trainer-tainment' [11](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_11),
[70](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_70)

*Training Journal*

*Training Journal* Awards ('TJs') [155](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_155),
[316](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_316)

training needs analysis [244](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_244)

training, vs facilitation [173](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_173)--74

Trello [251](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_251)

trust [80](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_80)

*Trust Guidebook, The *[130](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_130)

Tuckman, Bruce [141](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_141)

Twitter [13](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_13),
[16](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_16),
[172](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_172),
[251](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_251),
[261](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_261),
[328](#19_ENDMATTER_Afterword.xhtml#page_328)--29

Lists [127](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_127),
[249](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_249)

Twurly [12](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_12),
[126](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_126)

Tyas, James [158](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_158)

Uhl, Trish [143](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_143)

Unconferences [177](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_177),
[243](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_243),
[318](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_318)

Value Analysis [305](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_305)

value chains [105](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_105)

value of L&D, demonstrating [17](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_17)--19

360 degree reviews [17](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_17)

benchmarking [17](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_17)

business metrics [18](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_18)--19

internal conversations [18](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_18)

skills auditing [17](#03_CHAPTER_C01.xhtml#page_17)

values-led consulting [76](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_76)--79

vigilance [282](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_282)--84

Virtual College [85](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_85)--89,
*[88](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_88)*,
[199](#12_CHAPTER_C09.xhtml#page_199),
[221](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_221)

reflections on [89](#06_CHAPTER_C04.xhtml#page_89)

virtual reality (VR) [155](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_155),
[281](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_281)

Vygotsky, Lev [274](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_274),
[277](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_277)

Wakelet [126](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_126)

Watershed [101](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_101)

Webb, Liggy [312](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_312)

Weber, Emma [100](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_100)

webinars, evaluating [102](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_102)

Wenger, Etienne [127](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_127),
[129](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_129)

'What did you learn this week?'
(WDYLTW) [298](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_298)

WhatsApp [130](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_130),
[145](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_145),
[146](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_146),
[251](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_251)

Wheeler, Steve [144](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_144)

Whitehouse, Anna [151](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_151)

'Whole 100, The' [167](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_167)--68

whole-person learning [178](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_178)--79

wild writing [300](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_300)

Willcox, Phil [327](#19_ENDMATTER_Afterword.xhtml#page_327)

WIN (What is next?) [102](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_102),
[248](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_248),
[296](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_296)

Woodman, James [132](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_132)--34

word clouds [106](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_106)

World Vision [303](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_303)--05

WWW (What went well?) [102](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_102),
[248](#14_CHAPTER_C11.xhtml#page_248),
[296](#17_CHAPTER_C13.xhtml#page_296)

Wyke, Kev [177](#10_CHAPTER_C08.xhtml#page_177)

Yammer [100](#07_CHAPTER_C05.xhtml#page_100)

Yates, Dave [314](#18_CHAPTER_C14.xhtml#page_314)

YouTube [118](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_118),
[142](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_142),
[143](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_143),
[147](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_147),
[149](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_149)

'Zone of Proximal Development' [277](#16_CHAPTER_C12.xhtml#page_277)

Zoom [128](#08_CHAPTER_C06.xhtml#page_128),
[222](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_222),
[226](#13_CHAPTER_C10.xhtml#page_226)

'Zoom fatigue' [143](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_143),
[150](#09_CHAPTER_C07.xhtml#page_150)
:::

[]{#00_PRELIMS_s03_Copyright.xhtml}

<?xml-model href="koganpage.rnc" type="application/relax-ng-compact-syntax" ?>

:::::::::: {#00_PRELIMS_s03_Copyright.xhtml__00_PRELIMS_s03_Copyright_sec_001 .section .copyright .copyright-page aria-label="Copyright"}
::: {#00_PRELIMS_s03_Copyright.xhtml__00_PRELIMS_s03_Copyright_s2_Publisher_Note .section .publishers-note .notice aria-label="Publisher-Note" role="doc-notice"}
[]{#00_PRELIMS_s03_Copyright.xhtml_page_vi .pagebreak
aria-label="Page vi" role="doc-pagebreak"}Publisher's note

Every possible effort has been made to ensure that the information
contained in this book is accurate at the time of going to press, and
the publishers and authors cannot accept responsibility for any errors
or omissions, however caused. No responsibility for loss or damage
occasioned to any person acting, or refraining from action, as a result
of the material in this publication can be accepted by the publisher or
the author.
:::

First published in Great Britain and the United States in 2021 by Kogan
Page Limited

Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or private
study, or criticism or review, as permitted under the Copyright, Designs
and Patents Act 1988, this publication may only be reproduced, stored or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, with the prior permission in
writing of the publishers, or in the case of reprographic reproduction
in accordance with the terms and licences issued by the CLA. Enquiries
concerning reproduction outside these terms should be sent to the
publishers at the undermentioned addresses:

:::::: cols
::: col
2nd Floor, 45 Gee Street

London

EC1V 3RS

United Kingdom

[[www.koganpage.com]{.url-hyperlink}](https://www.koganpage.com)
:::

::: col
122 W 27th St, 10th Floor

New York, NY 10001

USA
:::

::: col
4737/23 Ansari Road

Daryaganj

New Delhi 110002

India
:::
::::::

© Michelle Parry-Slater 2021

The right of Michelle Parry-Slater to be identified as the author of
this work has been asserted by her in accordance with the Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988.

ISBNs

Hardback   978 1 789663 341

Paperback 978 1 7896 6332 7

Ebook      978 1 78966 333 4

::: {#00_PRELIMS_s03_Copyright.xhtml__00_PRELIMS_s03_Copyright_s03_cip .section .cip aria-label="Cip"}
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data

A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library.

Library of Congress Control Number

2020951739
:::

::: {#00_PRELIMS_s03_Copyright.xhtml__00_PRELIMS_s03_Copyright_s4_Supplier_Details .section .supplier-details aria-label="Supplier-Details"}
Typeset by [[Hong Kong FIVE Workshop, Hong
Kong]{.url-hyperlink}](http://www.hk5w.com.hk)

Print production managed by Jellyfish

Printed and bound by CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon CR0 4YY
:::
::::::::::
